The Project Gutenberg eBook of Second to None, Volume 2 (of 3), by James
Grant

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Second to None, Volume 2 (of 3)
       A Military Romance

Author: James Grant

Release Date: September 28, 2021 [eBook #66413]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Al Haines

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECOND TO NONE, VOLUME 2 (OF
3) ***






  SECOND TO NONE.


  A Military Romance.



  BY

  JAMES GRANT,

  AUTHOR OF
  "THE ROMANCE OF WAR," "THE CAPTAIN OF THE GUARD,"
  "THE YELLOW FRIGATE," ETC. ETC.



  IN THREE VOLUMES.

  VOL. II.



  LONDON:
  ROUTLEDGE, WARNE, AND ROUTLEDGE,
  BROADWAY, LUDGATE HILL.
  NEW YORK: 129, GRAND STREET.

  1864.




  CONTENTS

  OF

  THE SECOND VOLUME.

  CHAP.

  I. MARCH TO DOL
  II. A SKIRMISH
  III. HUSSARS AGAIN
  IV. MY NURSE
  V. NEWS OF THE ARMY
  VI. BOURGNEUF
  VII. LOVE AND ILLUSION
  VIII. I BECOME A SOUBRETTE
  IX. HAUTOIS
  X. THE BOUDOIR
  XI. STORY OF NINON DE L'ENCLOS
  XII. DISCOVERED
  XIII. SUSPENSE
  XIV. THE BLOODHOUND
  XV. THE FOREST OF ST. AUBIN DU CORMIER
  XVI. THE STRUGGLE
  XVII. THE CHAUMIÈRE
  XVIII. THE LIGHT TROOP
  XIX. CHARTERS' VOW
  XX. THE SACK OF CHERBOURG
  XXI. WHAT THE GAZETTE CONTAINED
  XXII. THE PRISON SHIP
  XXIII. "TRUTH IS STRANGER THAN FICTION"
  XXIV. WADHURST
  XXV. SAIL FOR GERMANY




SECOND TO NONE.



CHAPTER I.

MARCH TO DOL.

The city of St. Malo was now more closely reconnoitred by the
commander-in-chief, as well as by General Elliot, the
quartermaster-general, and other officers, who were unanimously of
opinion that, from its vast strength, a long time--a month at
least--must elapse before it could be reduced; and as the heavy
cannon and mortars requisite for such a siege were yet on board the
fleet, the idea of any assault upon the place should be relinquished,
more especially as French troops were advancing against us from
Normandy, Maine, and Anjou.

The approach by land to the small isle of Aaron on which it is
situated is by a mole or causeway, three-quarters of a mile in
length, by fifty-four feet in breath.  and this was daily covered by
the tide with slimy weeds.

The approach by sea was narrow, well defended by batteries, and was
otherwise dangerous to vessels venturing within gunshot.  On the
north St. Malo was quite inaccessible, in consequence of the height
of the rocks and strength of the fortifications which crown them.
The city was crowded with fugitives from the adjacent country, from
which they had retired by order of the noblesse, magistrates, and
echevins, to whom the Duke of Marlborough* sent a notice, that if the
peasantry did not return peaceably to their houses, he "would set
fire to them without delay."


* His Grace was Charles Spencer, fifth Earl of Sunderland, who
succeeded to the honours of his illustrious grandfather, John
Churchill, the great captain of Queen Anne's wars.


He also published a manifesto making known "to all the inhabitants of
Brittany, that the descent on their coast with the powerful army
under our command, and our formidable armament by sea, was not made
with the intention of making war on the inhabitants, except such as
should be found in arms, or should otherwise oppose the just war
which we were waging against His Majesty the most Christian King.

"Be it known, therefore," continues the manifesto, "to all who will
remain in peaceable possession of their habitations and effects, that
they may stay in their respective dwellings, and follow their usual
occupations; and that, excepting the customs and taxes which they pay
to the King, nothing will be required of them in money or merchandise
but what is absolutely necessary for the subsistence of the army, and
that for all the provisions they bring in ready money shall be paid,
&c.  Given from our headquarters at Paramé, June 7."

While the British general threatened destruction unless the peasantry
returned, the French authorities, on the other hand, threatened to
hang all who obeyed, so between them the poor Bretons were likely to
have a fine time of it.

Our troop was now ordered to accompany a regiment of foot which was
detached to Dol, a long march by steep old roads that went straight
up one hill and down another.

The day which succeeded that night of destruction at St. Servand and
St. Solidore was beautiful.  The sun of June was warm and glowing,
and brightly it shone on the bluff rocks and embattled walls of St.
Malo, on the masses of charred wreck that floated by the isle of
Aaron; on the dense old forests in the foreground, the blue hills
whose wavy outline towered in the distance, and on the blue sea that
stretched away towards the shores of England; on the quaint old
chateaux of the noblesse perched on rocks that overhung the mountain
torrents, and on the picturesque hovels of their vassals that nestled
under their protection, for vassalage yet lingered in primitive
Brittany.

These poor cottages, built of rough and unhewn stone, and plastered
with mud, we generally found to be abandoned by the inhabitants at
our approach.  In some places we passed stacks of slowly-burning wood
smouldering by the wayside; but the poor charcoal-burners had lied
when our drums woke the echoes of the mountain road.

"It is certainly not pleasant to find oneself in the character of an
invader!" said Charters, as we rode leisurely on.

When we proceeded further, we found the farms abandoned, the villas
deserted and stripped of all that was most valuable.  Goats no longer
grazed on the heathy mountain slopes, or cattle in the verdant
meadows; all had been driven off to forest recesses, to conceal them
from us; yet never was there less mischief done to private property
by an invading force than by us on this occasion.

During a halt near an ancient church, Jack Charters, observing the
earth at the root of a tree to have been recently disturbed, thrust
his sword into it, and about eighteen inches below the surface found
all the sacred vessels of the altar, tied up in a tablecloth.  There
were three elaborately chased gold chalices, a patine, and several
silver salvers and cruets.  Our troops were making merry on the
discovery of this plunder, when Charters, who never forgot his
forfeited position, and felt himself still a gentleman, restored the
whole to the curé of the church, who came to beg it of us.

Soon after, an officer of one of our foot regiments found near a
chateau a quantity of silver plate, worth several hundred pounds,
concealed in the same manner.  This officer sent the plate to the
chateau, from which the proprietor was absent (for indeed he was no
other than Captain the Chevalier de Boisguiller, who was making
himself so active against us), together with a letter, purporting
that he had restored the treasure, as we came not to war on the
people, but the government of France.  In proof of this, in many
instances our men shared their scanty rations with the poor and needy
whom they found by the wayside, and who trusted us.

Rumour of such acts as these having preceded us, we were kindly, even
warmly received by the people of Dol, which is an ancient episcopal
city surrounded by time-worn fortifications, and situated in the
midst of what was then a marshy plain.  Its mediæval streets are
quaint and narrow, with picturesque gables and carved gablets that
almost meet from either side of the way.

We entered it without opposition, after a fourteen miles' march, and
to our surprise the bells of the cathedral rung a merry peal in our
honour.  A contribution was levied on the city exchequer, and there
we passed the night after posting guards at all the gates and
outpickets beyond.  The duty apportioned to the light troop of the
Scots Greys was solely to furnish patrols on the various roads
leading to Dol, to prevent a surprise, for as yet we knew not exactly
what troops were in Brittany.

About daybreak on the following morning, I formed one of a party that
patrolled the highway in the direction of St. Aubin du Cormier.
Cornet Keith commanded, and Sergeant Duff and Corporal Charters were
with us.  Each officer and man carried oats for his horse in a bag,
and a bundle of hay trussed up in a net behind the saddle.  We were
only eleven in all.

Keith was a brave but inexperienced young officer, who had joined our
corps from Richmond's Foot in consequence of an incident which made
some noise in the service at the time.

Richmond's regiment enjoyed the unfortunate reputation of bring a
duelling one.  Indeed, there was scarcely an officer in it who had
not, at some time or other, paraded, and killed or wounded his man;
thus Keith, soon after joining it as a raw ensign, was informed by
the captain of the Grenadiers, "a fire-eater," that another officer
had treated him in a manner deserving severe notice, and that "after
_what_ had taken place"--the usual dubious, but constant phrase on
such occasions--he of the Grenadiers would gladly act as his friend;
_but_ that if Keith omitted to parade the insulter duly by daybreak
on the morrow, it would be noticed by the whole corps, and hopeless
"Coventry" would be the result.

Keith was unable to perceive that he had been in the least insulted;
but knew in a moment that his would-be friend had no other object in
view than to test his courage and arrange a duel, a little luxury the
corps had not enjoyed for two months past.  He perceived also, that
to maintain his own reputation, the fatal pistol _must_ be resorted
to; but as he had no intention of fighting an innocent man who had
never offended him, he threw his leather glove in the face of the
Grenadier, called him out, and shot him through the lungs as a lesson
for the future, and soon after obtained a transfer to the Greys, when
we were cantoned among the villages of the Sussex Coast, hunting for
smugglers.

We were riding leisurely in file, through a narrow lane, about two
miles from Dol.  It was bordered by wild vines, and shaded by
chestnut trees.  The grey daylight was just breaking; the pale mist
was rolling in masses along the mountain slopes, and the sweet odour
of the bay myrtle and of the wild flowers came on the morning breeze
from the marshes that lay between us and the city.

Save the tinkling of some chapel bell for matins among the mountains
all was still, and we heard only the hoofs of our horses and the
clatter of their chain bridles; but judge of our astonishment when
wheeling out of the narrow lane upon the highway that led direct to
Dol--the path by which we could alone return--we found in our front a
party of French Light Horse, forty at least of the same Hussars we
had encountered in the night near St. Solidore; and the moment we
came in sight they began to brandish their sabres, and to whoop and
yell in that manner peculiar to the French before engaging, while
many shouted loudly--

"_Vive le Roi! à bas les Anglais!_"




CHAPTER II.

A SKIRMISH.

Our young Cornet Keith never for an instant lost his presence of
mind, for he came of a brave stock, the old Keiths of Inverugie; thus
he was a near kinsman of Marshal Keith, who fell at the head of the
Prussian army on the plain of Hochkirchen.

"We must charge and break through those fellows," said he, coolly and
rapidly, "or we shall all be taken and cut to pieces."

"I fear, sir, it is impossible to break through," said Sergeant Duff,
as he cocked his holster pistol.

"Nothing of this kind is impossible to the Scots Greys!" replied the
young officer, proudly.

"Lead on, sir; and we shall never flinch," said Charters, with a
flushing cheek.

"Keep your horses well in hand, my lads," cried Keith.  "We may not
_all_ be killed--so prepare to charge! spur at them--fire your
pistols right into their teeth, and then fall on with the sword.
Forward--charge--hurrah and strike home!"

We received a confused discharge of pistols from those French
Hussars.  One of our horses fell and crushed his hapless rider.  In
the next moment we were right among them--firing our pistols by the
bridle hand, and hewing right and left, or fiercely giving point to
the front, with our long straight broadswords, beneath the weight of
which their short crooked sabres were as children's toys.  Here Big
Hob Elliot cut a Hussar's sword arm clean off, by a single stroke,
above the elbow.

Still they were too many for us.  There was a brief and most unequal
hand to hand conflict amid the smoke of our pistols, and red sparks
sprang high as the steel blades met and rung.  Cornet Keith clove one
Hussar to the eyes, ran a second through the breast, and being well
mounted on a magnificent grey horse, broke through the press of men
and chargers, and effected a retreat or flight--which you will--to
Dol.

Six others, of whom Jack Charters and Hob Elliot were two--succeeded
in following him; but three perished under the reiterated blows of
more than twenty sabres, while I, separated from the rest, had my
horse thrust half into a beech hedge by the pressure and numbers of
the enemy, whose leader, a brilliantly attired hussar officer, with a
white scarf across his shoulder, and golden grand cross of St. Louis
dangling from its crimson ribbon at his breast, attacked me with
great vigour.

Finding that I was quite his equal with the sword, he drew a pistol
from his saddle-bow and fired it straight at my head.  By a smart use
of the spurs and bit, I made my horse rear up; thus the bullet
entered his neck and saved me.  Then in its agony the poor animal
made a wild plunge, and bursting through the mob of hussars who
pressed about me, rushed along the road with such speed that I was
soon safe, even from their carbines, and found myself alone and free,
without a scratch or scar.

On, on flew the maddened horse, I knew not whither.  There was a
gurgling sound in his throat, and with every bound the red blood
welled up and poured from the bullet-wound over his grey skin, which
was drenched with the flowing torrent.

I lost my grenadier cap as he flew on, past cottages of mud and
thatch, and chateaux with turrets, vanes, and moats; past wayside
wells and votive crosses, and past those tall grey monoliths and
cromlechs that stud so thickly all the land of Brittany; past fields
of yellowing buckwheat and thickets of pale green vines, till, at a
sudden turn of the road, near an ancient and ruinous bridge that
spanned a deep and brawling torrent, he sank suddenly beneath me, and
fell heavily on the ground.

Disengaging myself from the saddle and stirrups, I proceeded to
examine the horse's wound.  His large eyes, once so bright, were
covered now with film, and his long red tongue was lolling out upon
the dusty road.  My gallant grey was in his death agony, and thrice
drew his sinewy legs up under his belly and thrust them forth with
convulsive energy.  At the third spasm, when I was stooping to
examine the wound, his off fore hoof struck me like a shot on the
right temple, inflicting a most severe and stunning wound, and I sank
senseless and bleeding beside him.

Half-an-hour probably elapsed before perfect consciousness returned.
Then I found my face so plastered by the blood which had flowed from
my wound, that my eyes were almost sealed up by it, and my hair,
which was curled (as we wore it so, and _not_ queued, like the troops
of other corps), was thickly clotted also.

In the mêlée, or race, I cannot remember which, I had lost my sword
and pistols, so concealment was my first thought; my second, anxiety
to reach Dol or the camp at Paramé.  How either was to be achieved in
a country where my red uniform marked me as a mortal foe and invader,
to be shot down--destroyed by any man, or by any means--was a point
not easy to solve.  Moreover, I knew not the language of Brittany, in
only some districts of which French is spoken.

I left my dead grey--poor Bob, for so he was named--with a bitter
sigh; for daily, since I became a soldier, had the noble horse fed
from my hand, and he knew my voice as well as the trumpet call for
"corn" or "water."

I walked along the road unsteadily, giddy, faint, and ill.  After
proceeding about a quarter of a mile, I came upon a four-wheeled wain
laden with straw, and standing neglected, apparently, by the wayside.
No horses were harnessed to it, and no driver or other person was
near.  It seemed to offer, until nightfall, a comfortable place of
concealment.  I clambered up, and, nestling down among the straw,
tied my handkerchief round my contused head to stop further bleeding,
and in a few minutes after, overcome by the sleepless patrolling of
the past night, the excitement and peril of the recent conflict, the
long and mad race run by my dying horse--a race perhaps of twenty or
thirty miles, for I knew not the distance--the pain of the wound his
hoof had given me, and the consequent loss of blood, I fell into a
deep and dreamless stupor, for I cannot call it sleep.

While I was in this state, it would seem that the proprietor of the
wain had come hither, yoked thereto a pair of horses, and, all
unconscious that there was anything else there than straw, forage for
the cavalry of the most Christian King--least of all a
"sacré-Anglais"--in the wain, drove leisurely and quietly off, I knew
not whither, as I neither stirred nor woke.




CHAPTER III.

HUSSARS AGAIN.

Evening had come on before I was awake, and, on looking upward, saw
above me the green leafy branches of some great trees.  Then, on
peeping from my nest amid the straw, I found, to my very great
astonishment, that the wain was not in the same place where I had
entered it, but that it was now at the end of a long and stately
avenue, and close to an embattled wall, in which there opened an
arched gateway surmounted by a coat of arms carved in stone.

I was about to investigate this circumstance further, when the sound
of voices near me, or apparently immediately under the huge wain,
made me shrink down and lie still and breathless to listen.

"Come, come, _mon ami_, don't lose your temper, for I assure you that
you have none to spare," said a female voice.

"Bah! you always laugh when I kiss you, Angelique," replied a man,
reproachfully; "why is this?"

"Because, Jacquot, your moustaches tickle me."

"You are always rather too ticklish between the nose and chin,"
retorted the other.

"Perhaps so, when Monsieur de Boisguiller and his hussars are here."

"_Pardieu_, if this be the case, then I shall go back to St. Malo, to
dine with the fat cits and dance with their pretty daughters."

"You?  Ha! ha!"

"Laugh as you may, mademoiselle: the coachman of Monsieur le Curé of
St. Solidore, who holds the consciences of half the province in his
keeping, is not without some importance at St. Malo, be assured."

"_Que cons êtes bon!_ (what a simpleton you are!) Kiss me and say
nothing more."

A certain remarkable sound followed; then the lovers, apparently
reconciled, passed through the archway, and I could perceive that the
man was no other than Jacquot Tricot, who had driven the
_d'esobligeant_ of the old Curé of St. Solidore, and that his
companion was a pretty and piquant young Bretonne, with fine features
and coal-black eyes, and having her dark hair dressed back _à la
marquise_, under a tall white cap of spotless linen.

She wore a tight red bodice, with its armholes so large that at the
back only an inch or two of the stuff remained between the shoulders;
but under this she had a pretty habit-shirt, which fully displayed
the swelling form of her fine bust and shoulders.  Her ample but
short black skirt, embroidered with silver, announced, after the
Breton custom, that she was not altogether dowerless, and by her high
instep, smart ankle, and taper leg, no one could doubt that Angelique
was a charming dancer.

I am thus particular in describing this girl, who was a piquante
little country beauty, full of queer Breton exclamations, because our
acquaintance did not end here.

My wound was very painful.  I felt weak and light-headed; but the
consciousness that other concealment was necessary made me look about
for a new lurking-place.

On one side of the avenue there opened a spacious lawn; on the other
lay a lake, and above the embattled wall and gateway the turrets of a
chateau were visible in the sunshine.  In the middle of the lawn grew
a thicket of shrubs or dwarf trees.  My course was soon determined
on--to reach the thicket and remain there concealed till nightfall,
and trust the rest to Providence.

I dropped from the summit of the straw-laden wain, and, passing
quickly through the line of lofty trees, was about to hurry across
the lawn, when I heard a shout uttered by many voices, and found
myself within fifty paces of a strong party of French Hussars, who
had picketed their horses near the avenue, and were quietly enjoying,
_al fresco_, a meal which had no doubt been sent to them from the
chateau.  It was quite a military picnic, as they were all lounging
on the grass, around cold pies, fowls, tarts, and bottles of wine,
with their jackets open, their belts and pelisses off.

So busy had they been with their jaws, that their tongues had been
silent hitherto, and thus I knew nothing of a vicinity so dangerous,
until it was too late to retreat.

Being defenceless, my first thought was to advance confidently and
surrender myself as a prisoner of war; but, on seeing that while some
rushed to their holsters to procure pistols, others snatched up their
sabres, with cries of--

"Down with the Englishman!  _Sacré Dieu!_"

"Shoot him down!"

"_A bas les Anglais!_"

"_Tuez_!  _Tuez_!  Cut him to pieces!" and so forth, I turned and
fled towards the chateau, followed by the whole party, some twenty in
number, on foot.

Several shots were fired, but I escaped them all.  I passed the wain,
dashed through the gateway within which Angelique and Jacquot were
still tenderly cooing and billing, and crossed the gravelled
courtyard, closely pursued by the hussars, who would no doubt have
immolated me there, had not a young lady who was standing on the
steps of the entrance-door in conversation with a brilliant-looking
cavalry officer, rushed forward and courageously and humanely
interposed between them and me, with her arms outspread.

"_Pardieu!_ where did you come from, _Coquin_?  Cut the fellow down!"
exclaimed the officer, who was the Chevalier Guillaume do
Boisguiller, and in whom I recognised my antagonist of the
morning--he of the white scarf, crimson ribbon, and grand cross of
St. Louis.

"_Ah, je vous prie_, monsieur le Chevalier--Messieurs les soldats,
don't harm him, pray," cried the young lady; and then she
added--"Nay, hold, I command you!"

"What! you intercede for him, do you?" said the officer, with haughty
surprise.

"Yes--I do, monsieur."

"Although he is one of those pestilent English who have been playing
the devil at Cancalle and St. Malo?"

"I care not--I am Jacqueline de Broglie."

It was she indeed--she whom I had rescued, and who gave me the
emerald ring by the wayside well; but she was now so richly attired,
and had her fine hair so perfectly dressed, that I did not at first,
and in such a terrible crisis, recognise her.

"_Parbleu_, 'tis very well.  Fall back, comrades, sheath your sabres,
and finish your luncheon, for we march at sunset," said the captain,
twisting his short moustache; "but what am I to understand by all
this, mademoiselle?"

"That he saved my life--my honour--scarcely four-and-twenty hours
ago," said she, emphatically.

"_Sacré!_ he nearly took both my life and honour this morning," said
the chevalier, with a grimace.

"And he is wounded--severely, too--the poor fellow!" she added, in a
voice of tender commiseration.

"What! is this the soldier of whom you were just speaking--he who
saved you from that rascal Hautois, on the night St. Solidore was
cannonaded and destroyed?" asked the hussar, with surprise.

"The same, Monsieur de Boisguiller, and I demand that here, on my own
threshold, his life shall be respected."

"So be it, mademoiselle; for your sake, I would spare the lives of
the whole British army, if such were your wish--assuredly it should
not be _mine_," said the captain, bowing low, with a tender glance in
his eye.

"I thank you, M. le Chevalier," replied the lady, laughing.

"And I congratulate you, M. le soldat, on having such an
intercessor," said the Frenchman, making a merit of necessity, and
with somewhat of apparent frankness presenting his hand to me.

At that moment the whole place, the chateau with its turrets, the
chevalier and the lady, appeared to whirl round me; the light went
from my eyes, and darkness seemed to descend in its place; I made a
wild clutch at a railing to prevent myself from falling, but failed;
and, sinking on the steps that led to the entrance, remember no more
of that interview.

For several days after this, all was confusion or all oblivion to me.

I was delirious and in a burning fever.




CHAPTER IV.

MY NURSE.

Where was I?

My next recollection, as the world came slowly back to me, or I to
it, was the circumstance of finding myself in a small octagonal
chamber, which was hung with pretty, but rather gaudy pictures of
saints, in long scarlet or blue garments; there were St. Peter with
his keys, St. Andrew with his cross, St. Catherine with her wheel,
and St. Malo with something else.  There were also a crucifix and
little font of Delft ware hung on the wall near me.

I was in a bed that was prettily draped by snow-white curtains, which
hung from a ring in the ceiling, and formed a complete bell-tent
around me, but were festooned back on one side.  The soft pillows
were edged with narrow lace.

The sun of the summer noon shone through the vine and ivy shaded
lattice, which was open, and the hum of the honey bee, with the sweet
perfume of summer flowers, came in together on the soft and ambient
air.

Close at hand stood a _guéridon_, as the French name those little
round tables which have three feet and one stem; and thereon were
some phials, a vase of flowers, and a silver cup, which suggested to
me, somehow, an idea of medicine.

I passed a hand across my brow; it was painful to the touch, and
throbbed.  My eyes were hot and heavy; my hand looked pale, thin, and
white--quite unlike what it usually was; hence I must have been long
ill--but _where_?

I strove to rise, that I might look forth from the window; but the
effort was too much for me yet, and I sank back on my pillow.

I seemed to have had strange dreams of late--dreams of my brief
soldiering; of the burning of the shipping; the faces and voices of
Charters, Kirkton, and others had come distinctly--especially poor
Tom's (the "stick it minister," as the Greys named him), and the
words of his song lingered in my ear:--

    "Why, soldiers, why,
    Should we be melancholy, boys,
  Whose business 'tis to die?


I had strange recollections of a warlike encounter with old Nathan
Wylie in a wood in Brittany, and shooting him there, to save my
cousin Aurora, whom he was tying to a tree.  Then my wound from the
charger's hoof, and the events subsequent thereto, gradually and
coherently unfolded themselves before me.  But where was I, and to
whom indebted?

Some one moved near me; I was certain there was the fall of a gentle
foot--of one who stepped on tiptoe.

"Who is there?" I asked in English, and then repeated the question in
French.

"Ah, you are awake--awake at last!" said a soft voice, in the latter
tongue.

"Who speaks?"

"_C'est moi_--'tis only me," replied a girl whose face was familiar
to me, as she drew back the curtain.

"Angelique?" said I, with an effort.

"Yes, Angelique; how droll--you know my name, monsieur!"

It was the pretty Bretonne, with her scanty bodice and spotlessly
white shirt; her black eyes beaming with kindness and pleasure; her
dark hair surmounted by her high linen coif of a fashion old as the
days of Charles VIII.

"You know me--you are sensible at last," she continued; "ah, how
happy mademoiselle will be to hear of this?"

"Who is she?"

"Ah, good heavens--is it possible--don't you know--Mademoiselle de
Broglie, your protectress?"

"And you?"

"I have the honour to be her _soubrette_--her friend almost, for we
are foster children.  Every morning and every night I made a sign of
the cross on your forehead with the holy water from my font, and I
knew that it would cure you, even if everything else failed."

"Cure me--I have, then, been ill?"

"_O! mon Dieu_--so ill!" shrugging her white shoulders and clasping
her little hands.

"But say, Mademoiselle Angelique, pray where am I?"

"In my room."

"Yours?"

"Oui, monsieur--there is nothing wonderful in that, is there?"

"And this bed?"

"It is _mine_," said she, smiling.

"You quite bewilder me," said I, with a sigh.

Her dark eyes and white teeth shone, as she burst into a fit of
laughter, and said:

"_Ah, mon Dieu_, what would Jacquot--the jealous Jacquot--think, if
he knew that a strange man had occupied my bed for two weeks?"

"Have I been here so long?"

"Yes, monsieur--you have been very ill."

"And you--you----"

"I have been occupying the apartments of Mademoiselle de Broglie; ah,
good heaven, what were you thinking of?" said the _soubrette_, with
another merry laugh.  "You occupy my room in the Chateau of
Bourgneuf, belonging to the Countess Ninon, mother of the young
count, who now is fighting under Maréchal de Broglie in Germany."

"Would Boisguiller's Hussars really have killed me, alone and
defenceless as I was?"

"Killed you, my poor child? of course they would."

"Are they still here?" I asked, with natural anxiety.

"_Ma foi!_ no--they have long since been gone in pursuit of the
English, who are flying in all directions towards the sea.  These
Hussars are very ferocious.  Some of them are contributions from the
_Fours_ of Paris, and valuable contributions to the army _they_ are,
as every one knows."

"_Fours_--I know not what you mean."

"Indeed!"

"No, I assure you," said I, laying my hand by chance upon hers.

"_Ma foi!_ it is quite true what Père Celestine says--nothing is
taught in England but heresy.  The _Fours_ in Paris are places of
confinement, formed by a Monsieur d'Argenson, wherein all wanderers
and vagabonds found in the streets are shut up, till the best are
drafted off to the army, and several of these choice recruits fell to
the lot of M. de Boisguiller.  So you had an escape, my poor boy;
they would positively have eaten you!"

"You are very patronising, Angelique," said I, amused by the girl's
manner; "pardon me, but how old are you?"

"One year older than my mistress."

"And she will be----"

"Nineteen by the next least of St. Malo; but hush, you must not talk
any more.  You are looking quite flushed already; now taste this."

In perfect innocence she put her plump white arm round my neck,
raised my head upon her pretty shoulder, took the silver cup from the
_guéridon_, and poured between my lips some of the cooling liquid it
contained.

"You are kind to me as a sister," said I.

"And I have nursed you so long, that I quite feel like one."

Her large dark eyes looked kindly into mine, and I could see my face
reflected in them.

"So long?" I murmured.

"Yes; fourteen days and fourteen nights."

"Ah, how can I ever repay all this?"

"By trying to sleep, and sleep you must," said she; then laying my
head gently on the pillow, she withdrew her arm, and closing my
eyelids playfully with her fingers, said again in my ear, "Sleep;"
and adding, "Père Celestine tells us that St. Paul said 'all kisses
were not holy,' but there can be no harm in _these_."  And touching
each eyelid with her cherry lip, she patted me on the cheek and
glided away.

But the tumult of thought banished sleep, and indeed she left me very
much awake.




CHAPTER V.

NEWS OF THE ARMY.

For two days that succeeded, the kindness and attention of my little
French nurse were undiminished, and on the third a soft dressing-gown
was brought to me, and I found myself seated in an easy-chair at the
open window, with a view of the distant hills, and in a fair way to
convalescence.

Was the pretty _soubrette_ in love with me, or was her peculiar
manner merely the impulsive nature of the Breton, together with
genuine pity for a helpless fellow-creature--a poor young
soldier--whom she had nursed?  Of course it was, for otherwise she
would not have spoken so frankly or so frequently of her lover,
Jacquot Tricot.

Notwithstanding the favours then heaped on me by fortune, such is the
perversity of human nature, that instead of being grateful for them,
at times, as I lay there, helpless, wounded, weary and alone,
thinking of the past, of what I was, and what I should have been,
something of the sullenness of despair stole into my heart, and I
actually longed for death to rid me of all further trouble, or care
for the future.  But to die there unknown, and so far, far away from
the sequestered churchyard, where in a pastoral glen upon the
Scottish Border, my father and mother lay side by side, with the
green mounds that covered them within sound of the silver Tweed, was
not the end I had so long anticipated.

Though a soldier, I was but a boy; and amid my loneliness in that
foreign land, I wept for the mother of whom I had known so little,
and hoped that from her place in heaven she was watching over me, and
perhaps could see me there.

Thought, reflection, and memory more frequently rendered me fierce
than sad, and then I closed my eyes, as if to shut out the light and
the world itself.

During one of these dreamy paroxysms of bitterness, a soft hand was
laid gently on my flushed forehead.  I looked up, and saw a lady--a
lovely young girl--with the soubrette beside me.

She was Jacqueline de Broglie!  I strove to rise and make some due
obeisance, but by an unmistakeable gesture she excused or rather
restrained me.

When I had first seen this noble-looking girl, her hair was
dishevelled, her dress was torn and disordered, her face was pale and
distorted by fear, and her eyes red and swollen by weeping.  Now I
beheld her perfectly calm, self-possessed, and richly-apparelled, for
her dress was of orange-coloured satin trimmed with black Maltese
lace, and it well became the purity of her complexion and the intense
darkness of her eyes and hair, every tress of which bore evidence of
the skilful hands of Angelique.  At first I thought her stately in
bearing and very pretty in feature, but as we conversed, she rapidly
became beautiful, and dangerously so, as her expressive face lit up
with animation.

Her smile was lovely, winning, and childlike; it was the true gift of
nature, but there was a singular combination of boldness and extreme
delicacy in the contour of her features.  Her forehead was broad
rather than high; the curve of her nostril was noble; her mouth and
chin full of sweetness and decision.  Add to these, a wonderful mass
of rich dark hair, in all the luxuriance of girlhood, and you see
Jacqueline.

She drew in a chair and seated herself near me, while Angelique stood
behind.  She expressed her satisfaction to find that I was
recovering, but added that the observance of the greatest secrecy was
necessary; that to save me from the rough peasantry, who were
infuriated by our wanton irruption into Brittany, she had kept me
concealed in a wing of the chateau--a portion appropriated by herself
and Angelique.  She mentioned that to deceive alike the servants of
the family, the neighbouring peasantry, and the Hussars of the
Chevalier de Boisguiller, it had been given out that I was conveyed
away in M. le Curé's _désobligeant_ to Dol; while in fact, by the
exertions of the curé and Angelique, I had been supported to my
present room when in a state of insensibility, and had remained there
in secrecy to the great risk of my own life, and of the honour of my
protectresses if discovered.  This was the plain and unvarnished
story, though Jacqueline worded it in a more delicate and gentle
manner.

"I am most grateful to you, mademoiselle," said I, "for your
kindness, your charity to me."

"Kindness--charity!  Why such cold words?  _Mon Dieu!_ monsieur, do
not talk thus.  Could I do less than, at every hazard to save and
protect one who saved and protected me?" she exclaimed, bending her
dark and beautiful eyes on mine with an expression of half-reproach
and inquiry which made my heart throb almost painfully, for I was
still weak and faint.

"And I have trespassed, intruded on your hospitality for so many
days.  In that time what may have been the fortune of war with my
comrades?  And madame your aunt; did she escape that night at St.
Solidore?"

"Yes; fortunately she reached St. Malo by a boat, and has not yet
returned; so at present I am lady supreme here--chatelaine of
Bourgneuf."

"I have been ill--very ill, and must have lost much blood," said I,
as the room seemed to whirl round me; "who has been my doctor?"

"Angelique, with my assistance.  There are no doctors nearer than
Rennes, the nuns of St. Gildas excepted, and they could not be taken
into our confidence, though good Père Celestine was.  So what was to
be done, but to seclude you here at the top of the house and trust to
Heaven and your youth for recovery."

"Dear Mademoiselle de Broglie, all this was more than I had any
reason to expect of you--more than human kindness!  Had I died here,
what would you have done?"

"Prayed for you," was the reply; "but ah, don't speak of such a
thing!"

"How the child talks!" said Angelique; "Monsieur de Boisguiller's
Hussars are playful lambs when compared to our Breton peasants--our
woodcutters and charcoal-burners.  They would have torn you limb from
limb had they caught you.  _Ma foi!_ yes--and they would storm the
chateau, perhaps, if they knew you were in it, as one would crack a
nutshell to get at the kernel."

"How far are we from the hills of Paramé?"

"About fifteen leagues," replied Mademoiselle de Broglie; "but why do
you ask?"

"Because our camp was there, mademoiselle."

"My poor friend, you are not aware of what has taken place since
fortune cast you almost dying at our door."

"A battle has been fought!"

"No; for the Duke of Marlborough, who lacks the skill of his great
namesake, on hearing that certain forces were marching against him,
under Monseigneur le Duc d'Aiguillon, Governor of Brittany, withdrew
his troops from Dol and Paramé, and retreating with all speed to the
bay of Cancalle, embarked his whole forces there on the 12th of this
month, and sailed for England."

"Are all gone?" I inquired, with irrepressible agitation.

"All--save the dead and you."

"And I am left here!" I exclaimed, overcome with consternation.

"With _us_," replied the lady with a pouting smile.

"True, mademoiselle; my exclamation is alike ungrateful and
ungallant; what matter is one poor trooper more or less."

"However, monsieur may soon see his friends again," continued
Mademoiselle de Broglie, "for they still menace our poor province of
Brittany.  So stormy has been the weather, that it was not until the
21st of this month the fleet got clear of the coast of France.  On
the 25th it was visible off Hâvre de Grace, which M. Marlborough
bravely enough reconnoitred in an open cutter; but Heaven favoured us
with another tempest, and the British were blown out to sea.  On the
27th----"

"Yesterday!"

"Only yesterday, as the Chevalier de Boisguiller informed me this
morning, they came to anchor within two miles of Cherbourg, and
hoisted out some flat-bottomed boats with the English guards to
attack the forts of Querqueville and L'Hommet; but again kind
Heaven----"

"With St. Malo and St. Suliac," interposed the _soubrette_.

"Sent a storm, so the attempt was abandoned, and Monsieur Howe stood
off to sea, where many of his transports were dashed to pieces."

"Many must have perished, and among them may be some of my dear
friends!" said I, sadly.

"I hope not, monsieur.  But your people should not have landed in
Brittany, which has ever been the best bulwark of France--'La
Bretagne, Brettonnante,' as we say.  When the wild Norseman menaced
our shores, in the days of King Dagobert, it was here they met with
the most bloody resistance.  Here Bertrand de Gruesclin routed the
English in the days of Charles VI., and here, too, were they defeated
in the days of Charles VII. by Arthur Count of Richemont, who was
Constable of France and Duke of Bretagne; while in the last century
your fleets were swept from our shores by those of Du Guay Trouin.
So excuse me saying, _mon ami_, that you were most unwise to attack
our old Celtic province of Brittany."

I could scarcely conceal a smile at this little bit of gasconade,
when I remembered how much mischief we had done to government
property, the ships and stores we had destroyed, unopposed by any
armed force save a few hussars; but the loveliness of the lips that
spoke repressed the rising spirit of retort.

"However," she added, smiling, "I am a Parisienne--_not_ a Bretonne."

"And why--why----"

"What, monsieur le soldat?"

"Why banished to this wild province?"

"I am not banished, as you unpleasantly term it," said she,
colouring; "but while my father is at the head of an army in Germany,
he prefers that I should reside here, with my aunt, Madame de
Bourgneuf.  But we have talked too long, and I must have wearied you."

"You, mademoiselle!" I was beginning, when she rose and said--

"Another day I will visit you, so, for the present, adieu."

I was no longer the bashful boy who had so timidly confessed his love
to little Ruth Wylie.  A few months of soldiering had rubbed the rust
completely off me.  Thus, when this French girl, with all her
imposing presence, her long train, and her hair _à la marquise_,
presented her hand to me, I pressed it to my lips with an air so
tender and withal so perfectly confident, that she withdrew it rather
hastily and retired.

I was again alone.

Strange and mysterious was the power that lurked in those lovely
eyes--in the slow droop of the fringed lids, and their upward sweep
when they flashed in smiles upon me.

I lay back in my easy-chair and closed my eyes, but they still seemed
to see the face and form of Jacqueline de Broglie.




CHAPTER VI.

BOURGNEUF.

The chateau of Bourgneuf, within which I so singularly found myself
an inhabitant, stands* on the north slope of a hill, about a mile
from the old highway that leads from Dol to Rennes, the capital of
Brittany, where _bourg_ signifies especially a village or residence.


* We may now say _stood_, as it was demolished in the wars subsequent
to the Revolution.


It was a fabric of striking aspect, but of large and irregular
proportions, having been built in the days of local war and
turbulence, when the lords of Bourgneuf kept constantly a numerous
body of armed men about them.  As the household consisted now only of
the widowed countess (then at St. Malo), her niece, Mademoiselle de
Broglie, and a few servants, for the young count was serving with his
regiment, but a small portion of this great mansion was inhabited,
and thus a melancholy stillness reigned in its long, shady galleries,
great suites of apartments, and round towers, the bases of which were
washed by the waters of a lake.

It had at least twenty steep conical roofs on its towers and turrets,
and each of these was surmounted by a grotesque iron girouette, as
the French name those vanes which were exclusively placed on the
houses of their ancient nobility.

In this chateau had Isabelle of Scotland, daughter of James I.,
passed two nights when proceeding to Rennes, where, in 1442, she was
married to Francis I., Duke of Bretagne; where the peasants yet sing
of her beauty, and the luxuriance of her golden hair.

The edifice resembled in style several of our old Scottish baronial
dwellings, such as Glammis or Castle Huntly, and I afterwards learnt
that it had been engrafted on an older fortress of the Counts of
Brittany, in which died Alain with the Strong Beard, in the tenth
century; and like all ancient castles in France, it had its legends
of blood and sorrow.

It was approached from the Rennes road through two rows of ancient
yews, of vast size, towering, solemn, and sombre.  Between each of
these stood an orange-tree in a green tub; and in the garden were
long walks covered with closely cut grass, and a labyrinth of trim
beech hedges of great height, amid the dense leaves of which the lark
and yellow-hammer built their nests undisturbed.

I remember the spacious entrance-hall, with its floor of tesselated
marble, its tall cabinets of ebony and _marqueterie_, piled with rare
china and Indian pagodas; its trophies of arms, a barred helmet or
dinted corslet forming the centre of each; its vast dining-hall, with
deeply-recessed windows, tapestry curtains, and chairs covered with
rose-coloured brocaded silk; and in that hall, Francis II., last Duke
of Brittany, had been feasted in 1459 by Roderique, Count of
Bourgneuf, who was slain by a Burgundian knight six years after at
the battle of Montleheri.

The long disused moat of the old mansion was overgrown by wild
brambles, and masses of clematis and ivy shrouded the cannon,
carriages and all, on the bastion at the outer gate.  Old pieces they
were--old perhaps as the days of the League; and above the gate they
had once defended, were carved the three besants of Bourgneuf,
impaled with the saltire of Broglie.

Such was the old chateau in Brittany, wherein the fortune of war had
so strangely cast me.

On the window of my bedroom I one day discovered the name of the
author of "Gil Blas," Alain René le Sage (who was a Breton), written
with a diamond, for he had once visited the chateau; this window
overlooked the lake, which was covered by water-lilies, and bordered
by long reedy grass, where the snipe lay concealed, and the tall
heron waded in search of the gold-scaled barbel.

Beyond this lake rose some steep and rugged rocks, nearly covered by
the yellow bells of the wild gorse; and on the highest stood a
haunted Druid stone, around which the fairies and the _poulpicous_
(their husbands) danced on certain nights.  This stone, as Angelique
assured me, bore a deep mark, the cut of Excalibur, the sword of King
Arthur, who is peculiarly the national hero of the Bretons.

How was I to get away from this secluded place?

By sea every port and harbour were watched and guarded.  If
discovered, the jealous military authorities would certainly put me
to death without much inquiry, as a spy; the peasantry as an invader;
the local magistrates or lords, would be sure to dispose of me as
_both_.

This was a tormenting question which even my kind little nurse
Angelique could in no way answer.  Indeed, she detailed so many
difficulties to be overcome, and so many dangers to be dared, that
there seemed a probability of my spending the term of my natural life
at the chateau of Bourgneuf, unless Commodore Howe with his fleet,
and His Grace of Marlborough with at least ten thousand men, paid
again a special visit to Brittany, the chance of which was very
slender; and a conversation, a portion of which I was compelled to
overhear, between Angelique and her lover Jacquot, served still more
to increase my anxiety to be gone.

He had come to announce the return of the countess in a few days,
after a certain pilgrimage, in which she was to accompany Père
Celestine and a train of devotees to the Hole of the Serpent, and see
the silver cross of St. Suliac dipped three times in the lonely cave
of La Guivre, a famous religious superstition of the Bretons.

What I overheard took place on the fourth day of my convalescence.

"So you are sulky and in a pet, Monsieur Jacquot?" said the
_soubrette_, pouting, with her hands in the pockets of her little
apron.

"Perchance I have reason to be so, Mademoiselle Angelique," replied
the other, with his hands thrust into his breeches pockets.

"You think yourself very clever, no doubt!"

"_Parbleu!_ what if I do?"

"I have heard that when at school----"

"Bah! don't talk of our days at school.  All clever men are dunces
there."

"A clever boy _you_ must have been!"

"_Morbleu!_" growled Jacquot; "a lover does not like to be laughed
at."

"In such a humour, Monsieur Jacquot, what in the name of goodness
brings you to me?"

"Say rather _badness_, mademoiselle, and it may better suit your
disposition."

"Indeed! are you jealous of anyone again?  Monsieur de Boisguiller
and his hussars are now gone to Rennes."

"Yes; but the spark who walks with you on the north terrace in the
twilight----"

"_O ciel!_ what are you saying?"

"Yes, and whom I have caught so often lurking among the shrubbery and
in the avenue at night; he, at least, is _not_ gone to Rennes.  An
ugly fellow he is too, with a mark like a bullet-hole in each cheek.
Eh, Mademoiselle Angelique, what say you to this?"

I did not hear the girl's reply, and they moved away from the room
adjoining mine; but I had heard enough to cause me intense alarm.  I
had been twice on the north terrace in the evening with Angelique;
but _who_ was the lurker detected by Jacquot in the shrubbery and
avenue?

"An ugly fellow with a mark like a bullet-hole in each cheek!"  My
heart foreboded in a moment that he must be the ruffian Hautois.

If he had traced me to the chateau, I was lost indeed!

No sooner was Jacquot gone, than Angelique came to me, and repeated
all that I had previously heard, adding that some disguise was
necessary now; but we knew not what kind to adopt.  In the meantime,
my uniform--my poor red coat, which I had first donned with such
pride at Rothbury--was concealed or destroyed, and she brought me a
hunting-suit of green cloth from the wardrobe of the absent count.

Still complete seclusion was necessary, and I could only take the air
in the evening, on a secluded terrace or upper bartizan of the
chateau, where Mademoiselle de Broglie and her attendant frequently
sat in a kind of bower formed by the projection of a turret and a
mass of wild roses, and where they read, chatted, or worked.

I had the pleasure of spending several evenings with Mademoiselle de
Broglie there, and with each of these lovely summer evenings, when
the purple shadow of the chateau fell far across the weedy lake,
whose waters rippled in opal tints, and when the Druid monolith on
the opposite rocks shone like a pillar of flame in the crimson light
of the setting sun, it seemed to me that I was becoming less and less
anxious about my escape from Bourgneuf, my flight from Brittany, and
my return to the army.

Why was this?  I asked my heart, and could only look for an answer in
the quiet deep eyes of Jacqueline.

Her emerald ring was still on my finger, and as I looked at it again
and again, and then on the lovely donor, the words of Charters, when
I first showed him the ring on that morning near our camp at Paramé,
came back to my memory like a prediction about to be verified.




CHAPTER VII.

LOVE AND ILLUSION.

On one of those evenings when Angelique was seated on a tabourette,
working with her pretty nimble fingers a piece of lace, and when
Jacqueline had tired of reading aloud the travels of the Comte de
Caylus, which were then in the zenith of their fame, and had
permitted the volume to drop listlessly from her hand, we began to
converse on the usual topics, dread of the countess's sudden return,
of her discovering me, and the means by which to escape from any
Breton seaport to England.  Mistrusting her discretion, it was
evident that the curé of St. Solidore had not informed her of _his_
share in my concealment, or of the circumstance at all, so madam was
yet in ignorance.

"Were I once clear of your cruisers from Brest and St. Malo in any
boat, however small, I might reach England, or be picked up," said I,
heedless that the distance from Portsmouth to Cherbourg alone was
seventy-five miles; "most loth am I to trespass further on your
kindness."

"Think of what I owe you, my life!" said Mademoiselle de Broglie, and
as our hands chanced to touch each other, we both trembled without
knowing why.

"I have met with so little kindness in the world, mademoiselle, that
there is no chance of my stock of gratitude becoming exhausted.  My
birthright is that of the disinherited--obscurity, poverty, and
mortification," said I, sadly.

"Ah!  What is this you tell me?" she exclaimed, turning her fine eyes
full upon me.

"My family have made me, as it were, an Ishmael--an outcast from amid
them; but they shall find----"  I clenched my teeth and paused in the
act of saying something bitter, for somehow my cousin Aurora's kind
face came to memory.  "Ah!  Mademoiselle de Broglie, if there was a
being in the world to whom I would lay open my whole heart--to whom I
would reveal the sad story of my past life, it is to you--you to whom
I owe so much."

"Your sad story, do you say?"

"Yes."

"At your years!" she exclaimed, while Angelique relinquished her
netting, and her dark eyes dilated as she listened.

"Yes, mademoiselle."

"_Ah, mon Dieu!_ this is terrible!"

I paused again, for I scarcely knew what to say.  Aware that all the
armies of Europe had long been teeming with desperate soldiers of
Fortune, the exiles of Scotland and Ireland, among whom were the
claimants of many attainted titles, from dukedoms and marquisates,
down to simple knighthood, I felt almost ashamed to reveal my real
rank, lest she might disbelieve me, and I should thus lose her
esteem.  I deemed it better to remain as she deemed me, the poor
gentleman, the "_simple soldat_."

"Orphaned in my youth, the victim of unmerited wrong and unjust
malevolence in manhood, there is not a human being save my comrades,
now I hope in England, far away, to whom my heart clings--not one who
cares for me, or for whom I can care----".

"Except me, I pray you, monsieur, except me," said she, smiling, and
with growing colour.

"And _me_," added Angelique.

I kissed the hand of each, and was replying,

"Gratitude for the service I rendered makes you kind, Mademoiselle de
Broglie----"

"Gratitude?  Well, be it so," said she, with her dark French eyes so
full of expression, that my heart beat quick and wildly.

At such times, was it not strange that Aurora's image with her soft,
bright English beauty always came to memory?  Yet, what was Aurora
Gauntlet to me, or I to her?  So I thrust the obtrusive idea--the
little romance of the lace handkerchief--aside, and gradually my
whole heart became filled with a deep and desperate love for
Jacqueline, a love I dared scarcely acknowledge to myself.

Instead of replying to her last remark, I again lifted her hand and
bent my lip over it; then she immediately rose and left me, followed
by Angelique.

Had I exhibited too much eagerness--had I offended her?  My heart
sank at the idea.

Anticipating with hope and fear the morrow, dreaming sadly or
tenderly over yesterday, ever communing with himself when alone, and
abstracted when with all save one, what a miserable dog is your young
lover!  When one grows older, and becomes a veteran in the service of
King Cupid, one learns to take these matters more quietly, like an
old soldier under fire.

"Hope makes us live," says a writer; it is the secret spirit that
lures us toward the future, to some mysterious time beyond the
present.  "Hope and sleep," says a proverb, "are the foes of care;"
but hope follows the impulses of imagination rather than the
convictions of reason, and so hope is the lover's grand ally.

I remained alone on the terrace till the red sun declined beyond the
dun, dark mountains, while the breeze of evening rippled the bosom of
the reedy lake, and waved the white water-lilies that floated there;
nor did I retire to my lurking-place--the pretty room which Angelique
had relinquished to me--until the pale crescent moon shone sharply
out, from amid the deep blue of the south-western sky, and two great
ravens, whose eyry was in the rocks, had winged their way across the
water, from the girouettes of the chateau, where they were wont to
sit and croak for hours.

I have more than once seen Angelique sign herself with the cross, on
seeing those two ravens, which she assured me were no other than the
doomed souls of King Grallon and his daughter--for all the land of
Brittany teems with legends of King Arthur and his knights of the
Round Table.

Did Jacqueline suspect the passion that now preyed upon me?  By her
knowing smiles, Angelique certainly _did_, and would no doubt inform
her of it; then if she deemed me presumptuous, or felt the passion
distasteful, would she not at least shun, if she did not expel me
from the chateau?

But Jacqueline did _neither_, so day after day stole on, until my
love for her became a part of my existence, for without her, life
seemed so valueless!  My passion was tender and true--so tender that
I could have worshipped her, and in my secret soul I did so.  The
most simple words spoken by Jacqueline--the most casual smile on her
lip, dwelt long in my memory, and sank deep in my heart.

Fancies I have had for others; but this was the passion that seemed
to satisfy _every illusion_--to be the love of all loves that a poor
human heart could desire; at least I thought so _then_.

And so, amid the wild and gloomy scenery around that old and secluded
chateau in Bretagne our companionship ripened from esteem and
friendship into love--but oh what a hopeless passion for both!

Her image came ever, unbidden, when she was absent; it pursued me and
became a part of myself; and where she was not, what pleasure had I?
and as my mind became filled with this new idol, my country, my duty
as a loyal subject, my honour as a soldier--liberty, all were
forgotten in worshipping Jacqueline.

Alas!  I was not yet twenty!

Years have come and gone since then, but never shall I forget the joy
of the time, when she first sunk on my breast, and whispered in my
ear, while her tears fell hot and fast--

"Yes, I love you, Basil--oh, I _do_ love you!  But in what can our
passion end, but destruction and despair?"




CHAPTER VIII.

I BECOME A SOUBRETTE.

Amid all this, we were somewhat flurried, when, one morning in
August, Madame de Bourgneuf unexpectedly drove up the long avenue to
the gate of the chateau, in her old-fashioned carriage, which
resembled a huge game-pie, or an antique tea-caddy on wheels, and
brought tidings that the coast, from the Isle d'Ouessant to Ostend,
was more than ever closely watched, as another descent of those
insolent heretics, the English, was expected, for the express and
envious purpose of demolishing the elegant fortifications erected by
Marshal Vauban at Cherbourg, and burning his Most Christian Majesty's
fleet, then ignobly blocked up in Brest by the squadrons of Lord
Anson, Sir Edward Hawke, and Commodore Howe, who, as an additional
insult to France, carried brooms at their mastheads, in token that
they swept the sea!

From the Governor of Brittany she had obtained all this intelligence
at St. Malo, and I immediately received it from Angelique, who, being
somewhat addicted to waggery and mischief, informed me in a whisper,
that "although madame, our aunt, had resided so long at St. Malo,
ostensibly to pay her devotions at the famous shrine of the
cathedral, it was more probably because the Duc d'Aiguillon had
appointed as Governor and Commandant of St. Malo, the old Comte de
Boisguiller--father of the chevalier--who, thirty years before, had
been madame's most devoted though unsuccessful lover: and now as both
were free, she was not without hope of kindling his passion
again--hence the old lady's devotion to the blessed bones of St.
Malo; but (added the soubrette, in the words of Jean Jacques
Rousseau) who ever heard of a pair of grey-haired lovers sighing for
each other?"

Now, what the deuce was to be done with _me_?

Madame was very strict about her domestics, and had rather austere
views on the subject of men in general and lovers in particular (M.
le Commandant excepted), yet, added Angelique, she always prefers as
a spiritual adviser the handsome young Abbé St. Servand to old Père
Celestine, of St. Solidore.

Terrified by the prospect of immediate discovery, of my ignominious
expulsion, perhaps punishment, poor Jacqueline became quite
paralysed, but her spirited abigail rose superior to the occasion,
and resolved that a more complete disguise, and an entirely new plan
of operations were at once necessary; so she insisted that I should
become, like herself, a _soubrette_ in the household.

Her clever little fingers--for she was neat and ready handed as all
Frenchwomen are--soon prepared a dress of her own for me, by letting
out a tuck or two in the skirts, altering the body and so forth.
Then she proceeded at once to have me attired, a feat I could never
have performed for myself.

She laced me up in a pair of her own stays, a merciless process,
which nearly suffocated me, and certainly caused a determination of
blood to the head; "but it was absolutely necessary," as she stated,
"that I should have a figure;" adding, as she fastened the lace, "in
time I shall make you quite pretty, monsieur, and then, if
Boisguiller's hussars come this way we shall be rivals for the
handsome sub-brigadier."

"Angelique, how you talk!"

"But the hussars----"

"Don't talk of them, pray.  The thought of meeting hussars in this
absurd dress makes my blood run cold."

"Then, think of mademoiselle.  _Ma foi!_ a Parisian girl like her
required some one to interest, to excite her, amid the gloom of this
old chateau, with its big rats and terrible legends, so you came just
in time to prevent her dying of _ennui_.  But for Jacquot I should
have fallen in love with you myself."

She took great pains with me; a few false curls adroitly pinned on,
and one of her own tall, coif-like Breton caps, of spotless white
linen, completed my head gear.  She patted my chin, and thanked
Heaven I wore neither beard nor moustache; then I joined her in a
hearty fit of laughter, on surveying myself in a mirror.

"What would Jack Charters, Tom Kirkton, or other fellows of ours, say
if they could see me thus!" was my first thought.

Angelique taught me how to seat myself, and how to hold myself when
seated; how to spread or gather my skirts when ascending or
descending stairs; and she burst again and again into ringing fits of
laughter at the length of ankle I exhibited.  At last, after being
well drilled, I was taken to the drawing-room, and with a heart that
certainly palpitated, and a cheek that blushed truly with shame and
ridicule, I was presented to madame, as the new attendant of
mademoiselle--a girl from the wild marshes of the Morbihan.

My costume was perfect, even to the black velvet necklet, which no
Breton girl is ever without.

Jacqueline grew very pale, but a smile twinkled in her tearful dark
eyes, when she retired behind the chair of her aunt, who bowed
politely, and surveyed me through her eyeglass, as I advanced,
courtseying at every second step, my hands folded meekly across my
breast, and my eyes cast modestly down, in a manner taught me by that
pretty rogue, Angelique.

The idea occurred to me that a candid confession of who I was, and
the weight of the mutual service Jacqueline and I had rendered each
other, would have been better than the adoption of this absurd and
most dangerous disguise, which could only serve to complicate the
perils of my present position; but there was no resource--I was in
for it now!

"Approach, girl," said the countess, "come nearer me.  You have a
very fair skin for a girl from the Morbihan."

"My mother, madame, was an English woman," said I, courtseying lower;
to have said a _Scots woman_ would have served my purpose better in
France, for the countess said, sharply--

"So much the worse--so much the worse, girl!  You have, however, I
hope, been well instructed in all religious duties, and never omit
mass or confession."

"Mon Père Celestine will answer for me," said I, confident that the
good priest would protect me, whatever came to pass.

"_Très bien_!  I expect him to visit us in a few days, together with
the Comte de Boisguiller, Commandant of St. Malo."  (This reply, like
a double-headed shot, was not very restoring), "but why do you
require a _second_ attendant, Jacqueline--is not Angelique enough for
you?  What is your name?"

"Basile, madame, so please you."

"Basile what?"

(The deuce take it!  I had not thought of a name.)

"Basile Gantelet," said Angelique, replying for me.

"Your parents and family?----"

"Were poor fisher people, all carried off by the English fleet, and
are now in some horrid prison."

"The English, as Comte de Boisguiller says, it is always those
pestilent English, we can neither move for them by land or sea.
_Tres bien!_ my good girl, I am pleased with mademoiselle's choice,
and like your modest appearance so much, that I think I shall retain
you about my own person.  If you please me, I shall have your ears
pierced, and present you with a pair of my own earrings at the next
feast of St. Malo."

"Oh, madame, how happy I shall be to attend so dear, so delightful,
so handsome a lady!" said I, courtseying thrice, but feeling,
nevertheless, in no way delighted by the prospect of the ear-piercing
process.

"Adieu, my child," replied the countess, with a gratified smile.
"Angelique will instruct you in your new duties; and, as you are from
the melancholy district of the Morbihan--the land of salt marshes,
and the Montagues Noires, of old feuds, solemn pilgrimages, and
ruined castles, I shall expect you to entertain us with some droll
legends of especially those wicked little fiends the Courils and
Torrigans, who infest the roads at nightfall, and make travellers
dance till they die of fatigue."

Angelique hurried me away; our interview had been most successful!
Madame de Bourgneuf was now in her sixtieth year.  Few women, even in
blooming England, are charming at that age; but in France they are
frequently horrible!  She could never have been beautiful at any
time, and though her hazel eyes were large and bright, her shrivelled
skin had the hue of an old drumhead, that had undergone the rain and
marches of three campaigns; yet, strange to say, she bore a
resemblance to her beautiful niece, which made me ask tremulously in
my heart, would Jacqueline ever become so plain, even if she lived to
the years of old Parr?

The countess had a profusion of real and false hair, all of snowy
whiteness, always dressed _à la Marquise_, and by her ornaments, and
general style of attire, it was evident that she knew not the art of
growing gracefully old; but was resolved to be young, and to keep her
colours flying to the last.  With all this, she was a perfect
repertory of old stories of the court of France, legends of the
saints, and historic memories of Brittany.

I soon found that my new attire entailed upon me many annoyances.  I
strove to avoid all the domestics of the chateau; but the jealousy
and curiosity of the women to see and to converse with the new
comer--this wonderful _paysanne_ of the Morbihan, who was constantly
with their young mistress, who could sketch in her album, and knew
_when_ to turn over the leaves of her music when she played--together
with the delicate attentions paid to me by Urbain the gardener,
Bertrand the porter, the valets and the coachman, became so alarming
that I could scarcely quit Jacqueline's suite of apartments, or leave
the chateau alone for a moment.

To all, I was a puzzle!  Some said I was a clumsy Norman--a
phlegmatic Fleming--a Navarrese; the men declared my bearing odd; the
women, my accent to be more so; but the gardener, with his bouquets,
was an admirer so devoted, that I dared never venture into the
garden, or into the avenue, when he was clipping the yews, or tending
his orange tubs.

Then judge of my alarm, when one day the mischievous Angelique, with
her black eyebrows arched to the roots of her hair, her large eyes
dilated with mock dismay, and a smile of drollery on her rosy mouth,
began thus--

"Oh, Mademoiselle Basile--oh, how unfortunate you are!"

"What has happened?" I exclaimed.

"Madame has conceived a greater fancy for you than ever!"

"Indeed!" said I, drily, while smoothing my front hair, before a
glass; "then I suppose she is going to have my ears pierced at last?"

"_Ma foi!_ what do you think? as she is too much afraid of ghosts to
repose alone, you must take the place of mademoiselle and me."

"What! ridiculous--I shall sell out--resign--desert from the
chateau!" I exclaimed, while ready to sink with alarm and anger,
until the wicked wag who had invented the whole story, burst out into
a fit of laughter, at the dreary expression of my face.




CHAPTER IX.

HAUTOIS.

The absurdity and annoyance entailed by my new character, together
with the study and trouble it cost me to play such a part, would have
been intolerable but for the facilities it afforded me for enjoying
with perfect freedom the society of Jacqueline.  Thus, together we
could ramble for hours, in the shady walks of the garden, and the
green leafy turnings of the labyrinth, or sit in the bowers of
fragrant roses, which were trained, trimmed, and cultured by my
admirer, the gardener, whose name I shall long remember, was Urbain.

In the labyrinth we lost ourselves so often that the countess one
day, somewhat to the confusion of poor Jacqueline, named it the _Val
sans retour_, after that in the Breton forest of Broceliande--a
mysterious path, out of which no false or fickle lover can ever
return, for there the fairies raise up an impenetrable and impassable
barrier.  In that forest, too, say the legendaries, lies the tomb of
Myrddyna, beneath a fatal and enchanted stone.

If the curé of St. Solidore actually paid madame the visit she spoke
of, discovery was certain.  I did not fear the good man much, save a
severe rebuke for conduct that was unseemly; but then there was that
devil of a commandant coming also from St. Malo, and already in
anticipation, I felt myself a prisoner in its dreary casemates that
overhung the sea!

This idea filled Jacqueline with terror.

"Give me up and leave me," said she, with hands clasped upon her
forehead, while her tears fell fast, "to what end do we love each
other, Basil?"

"True, Jacqueline--to what end indeed!  But to give you up is
impossible.  To love you has become a part of my nature, my
existence--myself; and being with you daily, has made that which was
a passion, a confirmed habit."

"In mercy do not speak thus, I love you--love you dearly; yet our
marriage is impossible, and I can see no future but despair."

"I know it," said I, gloomily and with clenched teeth.  "Cursed be
the fate that threw us together--the folly that kept me lingering
here."

"Better would it have been that we had never met."

"That I had never rescued you, do you mean?"

"Or I you?" she would exclaim with a sad smile; and then a long, long
kiss would close these interviews of mingled passion, joy, and pain.

One evening, after escorting Jacqueline to the door of the chateau,
instead of entering with her I returned to the garden, for the
purpose of dreaming over all that had passed between us, and also
considering seriously the future, and what could be the end of a love
so rash and desperate as ours.  Twilight had set in, and from the
garden I issued to the long avenue that led to the Rennes-road.  It
was dark and gloomy, and the clipped yews assumed all kinds of quaint
and terrible forms.  While loitering there, I became conscious that a
man was observing me from behind one of the orange tubs, one of
which, I have said, stood between each of the yews.  Having no desire
to meet any one, I was turning off hastily towards the chateau, when
suddenly the lurker stepped before me, saying--

"_Pardieu_, my pretty one, it seems that he you wait for is not
likely to come.  Permit me to offer you my arm."

He was a tall, swinging fellow of a repulsive aspect, with a long
knife in his belt and a broad hat slouched over his gloomy eyes.

"Stand back, monsieur," said I, firmly; "back, or it may be the worse
for you.  I am one of the household of Madame la Comtesse de
Bourgneuf."

"I know that well enough; but don't be alarmed, my fair one--I am
only a sportsman."

"Then permit me to pass."

"_Oui_--but I am a sportsman who looks for better game than a clumsy
soubrette," said the fellow, whom I now perceived to be tipsy.

"Indeed, monsieur."

"_Vraiment_--perhaps Mademoiselle de Broglie herself.  Does she often
promenade here in the evening?"

Gathering my skirts up to my knees, as they sorely impeded me, I was
running quickly away, encumbered by my stays and the paddings with
which Angelique in her zeal had furnished them, when this man, who
was both strong and active, overtook and confronted me again.

"Stop--speak!" he thundered out with a strange oath which I had
somewhere heard before.  "_Pardieu_, my saucy one, I shall teach you
that I have not dragged a chain in the casemates of St. Malo, and at
the aqueducts of Dol, for nothing."

"You are----" said I, gasping.

"Theophile Hautois," said he, closing the question.

I was thunderstruck, and the memory of Captain Brook, of the outrage
he had contemplated with regard to Jacqueline, and my own narrow
escape from his deadly _couteau de chasse_, flashed at once upon my
memory.  I was unarmed, defenceless, and sadly encumbered by my new
costume, though at the same time it effectually disguised me.

I paused for a moment to recover my breath, and then concentrating
all my strength and fury in one decisive blow, dealt fairly between
the eyes, I knocked the ponderous ruffian down like a nine-pin, and,
darting off towards the chateau, reached the vestibule in a state so
breathless and excited, that any one who saw me would have deemed me
a most timid and gentle woman in reality.

What Master Hautois thought, on receiving such a knock on the head
from a fair hand, it may be difficult to conceive; but I saw no more
of him for some time, nor could he be found, though the whole of the
grounds were immediately and rigorously searched by Urbain and a
party of armed men.

That this daring outlaw should prowl so near the chateau filled
Jacqueline and her maid with the greatest alarm; and for myself, I
took the precaution to carry about with me a small pistol, the charge
of which I frequently renewed.

In the boudoir of the countess (a charming little circular chamber
which opened off the drawing-room, and was entirely hung with
rose-coloured silk, and had long windows which overlooked the garden
and labyrinth), I was detailing to her my adventure in the avenue,
and was also employed in the manly occupation of winding a skein of
silk for some piece of work which her niece and Angelique were
manufacturing for the cathedral of St. Malo, when the countess said
to me--

"Basile, my child, you look very sad."

"Do I seem so, madame?"

"Yes," she continued, surveying me through her glass--a process which
always made me wince; "I can read a sad expression in your eyes."

"It may be so, madame, there are few hearts without some hidden
sorrow--some veiled secret."

"But you are so young!  Ah, I see, you are in love!"

"It may be so," said I again, with a furtive glance at Jacqueline,
near whom I was kneeling, and who grew pale as her aunt spoke.

"With some one far away?"

"Do not press me, madame; suffice that it is a mad and almost
hopeless love--hopeless as regards its future," said I, bitterly,
while Jacqueline gave me a secret and imploring glance.  "I love,
madam, how dearly and how deeply, is known only to Heaven and myself.
There--that is my secret--that my hidden sorrow and joy--joy for the
delight it gives me, and sorrow for its future."

The face of Jacqueline beamed with pleasure, and her eyes sparkled as
she bent her flushed face over her needlework.

"I would that M. Jacquot would speak thus of me," said Angelique, "I
shall pull his ears some day, till he does so."

The old lady politely asked pardon of me for her curiosity, and was
proceeding to detail some of her own early experiences and to
rehearse the number of Counts, Abbés, Chevaliers, and Grand Crosses
of St. Louis, who had sighed and died for her, when a servant
suddenly announced the Chevalier de Boisguiller; then we heard the
clank of a sabre with the jingle of spurs, and that gay hussar in his
brilliant uniform, all gold braid and bell buttons, with his fur cap
in one hand, and the other caressing his dearly cherished moustache,
entered, bowing and smiling to us all.

He was _en route_, he said, with his troop, from Rennes to the coast,
and as he would pass near St. Malo, he had galloped on in front to
pay his respects at the chateau, and obtain the honour of conveying
any message for his father, the commandant, from the Countess
Ninon--one who far excelled the Ninon of the preceding age.

There was mischief lurking in the handsome fellow's eyes as he said
all this.  He soon detected an impudent smile on the lips of
Angelique, and, ere long, I found him eyeing me sharply through his
glass, and I felt a horrible dread lest _he_ should recognise me, or
discover my sex.

I was certain the crisis had come, when the hussar captain said--

"By-the-by, my dear mademoiselle, what did you make of the
Englishman, whose life you saved from my fellows, when we were last
here?"

"The young man who saved my life from Hautois?" asked Jacqueline,
slowly.

"Yes, 'twas turn about, it would seem."

"Monsieur le Chevalier, he was taken to St. Malo," said Angelique,
who came to the rescue of her mistress.

"And since then, my girl?"

"We have heard no more of him."

"'Tis well," said the chevalier, who, as his eye chanced again to
fall on me, caused my heart to swell alternately with alarm and
anger.  "Those English folks are about to pay us a visit again."

"Again--_O mon Dieu!_" we all exclaimed together.

"More shipping and troops are being concentrated at their rendezvous
of both Portsmouth and Plymouth," said he, while playing with the
gold tassels of the cord which held the furred pelisse on his left
shoulder; "but my father is ready for them at St. Malo, and Brest and
Cherbourg are in excellent hands."

Though reflection or thought evidently but seldom troubled our
hussar, he now proceeded to make some remarks with which I, mentally,
coincided.

"_Parbleu!_ what did the King of Great Britain propose to gain by
invading France with a force of about twelve thousand men?  He takes
a town or so, which he cannot keep--he effects a landing under great
difficulties on our most dangerous coast, and lands only to embark
again."

"The British did not invade France with the hope of conquest," said
Jacqueline; "but to harass us and destroy our arsenals it would
appear."

"Well, fair cousin, it may be so; but as the Duc de Marlborough is
not like his namesake who fought against the Grand Monarque, I don't
believe our courtiers at Paris or Versailles were very much alarmed
by this recent landing of a handful of British at Cancalle Bay.  At
Versailles, they quite laughed at the idea of John Bull's vast
armament to burn some fifteen or twenty old crazy hulks at St.
Solidore."

"Fifteen or twenty, monsieur," said I, with unwise pique; "I thought
the British destroyed eighty-six vessels of all kinds, and sank or
destroyed two hundred and thirty-four pieces of cannon."

"_Peste!_ you are well informed, my fair soubrette," said the
captain, fixing his glass in his eye, and giving me a steady stare,
while Jacqueline looked at me imploringly, and with intense alarm.

"Peace, Basile," said the countess, severely.

"But so many troops are now entering Brittany from all points,"
resumed the chevalier, "to strengthen the hands of the Duc
d'Aiguillon, that I don't think our island neighbours will be so rash
as to visit us again."

Kettledrums were now heard in the distance.  I felt my cheek
flush--my ears tingle at the sound; and when I looked up from my
skein of silk, the keen eyes of Boisguiller were still regarding me.

"Already I must tear myself away, countess," said he, rising; "my
troop will be here immediately."

"Why not halt for a time?"

"Nay, madame, a hundred men and horses are too many to trespass on
your generosity, as our advanced party did before.  Adieu,
mademoiselle!" said he, kissing the hand of Jacqueline with a
tenderness that certainly was _not_ bestowed upon the yellow fingers
of the Aunt Ninon; "adieu, pretty Angelique--and you, what is your
name, mademoiselle?"

"Basile."

"Have you any tender messages for the Queen's Own Hussars?  Believe
me, girls, you are both too pretty to become the helpmates of
charcoal-burners, and Breton woodcutters; so think of _us_ sometimes."

Then with a low bow the chevalier pirouetted out of the room, and my
heart beat more freely when I heard his horse galloping down the
avenue.




CHAPTER X.

THE BOUDOIR.

From a window I saw the hussars defiling by threes, past the end of
the long and stately avenue of yews--along the road that led from
Rennes.  I heard the patter of the kettledrums, and saw the
glittering sabres, the rich uniforms, the waving plumes, the braided
pelisses, the gaudy housings of the horses, the sky-blue standard
with the three _fleurs de lys_, that waved in the centre of the
troop; and my heart swelled with proud and regretful emotions, as I
thought of my present absurd and dangerous position, of my absent
comrades--the lads who boasted themselves "second to none," and with
whom I had twice ridden sword in hand, through the ranks of
Boisguiller's Hussars.

That the chevalier was an ardent admirer of Jacqueline I perceived
but too plainly; yet I did not dread him much as a rival, especially
as the Catholic Church will not--unless in very particular
instances--permit the marriage of cousins, and they were both within
the forbidden degrees.  But I dreaded his discovering me--his
probable revenge for the insult implied by my residence so near his
cousin; and yet this chevalier was a handsome, brave, and gallant
fellow.

I was roused from my reverie by a soft hand that was laid caressingly
on mine.  I turned, and met the pretty face and dark eyes of
Angelique.

"Twice, monsieur," said she, "I thought our rogue of a chevalier had
discovered you; what eyes he has!"

"Tell me, Angelique: this chevalier, who was so anxious to have me
knocked on the head when I first came here, does he--does he----"

"What, kiss me occasionally?  Of course, every one does so
sometimes--that is, except you."

"I can soon make amends for this unpardonable omission."

"That will do; _one_ is enough, in that dress especially.  Well?"

"Does he love your mistress?"

"He is her cousin.  Of course he loves her."

"The devil!"

"But every one does."

"Does she love him?"

"Can _you_ ask me that?" said the Breton girl, turning on me with her
black eyes flashing.

I was silent, for I now knew that the prudent Angelique was
completely the mistress of our dangerous secret.

"Well has propinquity done its work!" thought I.

I found the Countess Ninon very amusing (though fond of recurring
with sorrowful recollections to her first love, a Scottish captain in
the Irish Dragoons of Lord Clare, who had fallen in battle
somewhere); and notwithstanding the little vanities incident to her
years, sex, and country, her conversation was instructive.  Thus,
while attending her and her niece in their walks, &c., I listened
with pleasure to her anecdotes of the court of Louis XIV., and even
of that of Louis XIII., which she had gleaned from her mother.

At night, when the perfumed wax-candles were lighted in her boudoir,
and I was busy with my skeins of silk, while she and Angelique plied
their needles on the embroidery for that Right Reverend Father, the
Bishop of St. Malo, she would tell us many a strange old story of the
Breton wars between Guy of Thouars and Philip Augustus; of the
enchanted sea-ducks that were neither fish nor flesh, but grew
between the planks of ships that sailed in Breton waters; of the
toad-stones that were found in the mountains, and proved a sovereign
remedy for all manner of poisons; of the terrors of the Black Forest
of Hunandaye; of the buried cities of Is and Douarnenez; of the
ghosts that shrieked in the ancient vaults that lie between Rieux and
Redon, and the subterranean torrent of St. Aubyn du Cormier.

She knew also many strange and wild legends of the great stones that
stud all the land so thickly from Lorient to Quiberon--rising out of
lonely heaths that are covered with holly and thistles, like that
great block which marks, near Morlaix, where a peasant was devoured
by the Moon, for blaspheming her.  She told of the dreadful
shipwrecks the Point of Raz had witnessed; of the Bay of the Dead,
and the island of Sein, a melancholy sandholm, whereon neither grass
nor trees will grow, and which was, of old, the abode of Celtic
witches, who sold fair winds or foul to the Breton mariners.

I remember being particularly struck with a strange story which she
related of the famous Ninon de L'Enclos, who is said to have
preserved her beauty until she numbered ninety years.

We were seated in her boudoir.  It was the fourth evening of my
obnoxious masquerading.  The eternal piece of embroidery for the
bishop was finished at last, and Angelique was busy with the soft,
silky, and luxuriant black hair of Jacqueline, which she had
unloosed, and was pinning up for the night, before a large mirror,
while I sat on a _tabourette_ at some distance, contemplating with
secret joy and admiration the beauty of one I loved so much, and
envying her soubrette, a service which I could neither imitate nor
perform.

It would seem as if the beautiful girl felt some coquettish joy in
the contemplation of herself, for after a pause she said to her aunt--

"Tell me honestly, my dear aunt, am I as pretty as you could wish?"

"Quite so, Jacqueline."

"And you, Basile?"

I could only clasp my hands in silence.

"Yet," resumed Madame, "you are not half so pretty as I was at the
same age."

"When Milord Clare's Irish dragoons lay at Versailles?" said
Jacqueline, quickly adding, "of course not, dear aunt; I could not
hope to excel you.  The old Comte de Boisguiller is always polite
enough to tell me so."

"Does he indeed?  Dear M. le Comte!" said Madame, applying a gold
vinaigrette to her nose to conceal a gratified smile.  "You are
charming, Jacqueline.  But remember that faces which are pretty in
youth often become hideous in age."

"You were beautiful, aunt?"

"Like yourself, Jacqueline.  When Lord Clare's----"

"I do not care; I shall marry when young and lovely, and when old and
hideous my husband cannot put me away."

"But he may love some one else."

Jacqueline glanced at me coquettishly between the masses that
overhung her face, and her smile made my heart beat lightly and
joyously.

"Oh, to be like Ninon de l'Enclos," said she; "always lovely!"

"Always?"

"Yes, dear aunt."

"Do you know the true, the terrible story of the reckless woman you
speak of?" asked the countess, gravely.

"No; does it convey a moral?"

"A most severe one; shall I tell it you?"

"If you please, dear aunt, and if it is not too dreadful," replied
Jacqueline, as she ran her slender white fingers through the masses
of dark hair that overhung her shoulders.

Then without further preamble, the garrulous old countess commenced
the following narrative, which, to say truth, I thought a very
strange one; but the subject of it was the bosom-friend of Madame de
Maintenon, of the Marquise de Sévigné, and moved in the best society
of the very singular Paris of her day.




CHAPTER XI.

STORY OF NINON DE L'ENCLOS.

Ninon, I have said, had lovers when verging on her ninetieth year!
Whence came this mystery?  Like Poppæa Sabina, the second wife of
Nero, Ninon is averred to have preserved her wondrous beauty
unimpaired to extreme old age, by using baths of asses' milk; but it
was neither these, nor the famous cosmetic, so long known among our
Parisian belles as _Crême de l'Enclos_, the component parts of which
are milk, lemon-juice and brandy, which preserved the dazzling
complexion and delicate skin of Ninon for so many years untouched by
Time; but a spell wrought upon her by the great master of evil, whom
she served throughout a long and wasted life.

It would seem as if Time, the destroyer of all things, failed to
impair the charms of Ninon, at least entirely, for he could not
deprive her of her marvellous power to win and seduce; thus, at her
age of ninety, does not the Abbé Chaulieu say? "that Cupid had
retreated even into the lines of her forehead."  Hence in age she was
worshipped for her beauty, by the _grandsons_ of those who had loved
her in the bloom of her youth!

Ninon was born at Paris in May, 1616, during the reign of Louis XIII.
Her father was a gallant, but dissipated gentleman of Touraine, who
had fought in the battles of Henry the Great.  Her mother was
Mademoiselle de Raconis, a lady of Orleans, from whom she inherited
her beauty and gaiety of disposition.  Monsieur de l'Enclos was
passionately fond of music, and inspired his daughter with the same
taste, so that in girlhood she became mistress of the lute, the harp
and guitar; but Madame de l'Enclos, who destined her for a convent,
was averse to such accomplishments as frivolities, and was careful to
take her daughter to Notre Dame twice daily--that is, to morning mass
and to evening vespers; but little Ninon always substituted for her
missal some little volume of poetry, or a romance which she read
under her veil, as she knelt before the altar, thus her responses
were often very odd ones.

Before she was ten years of age she had all Charron and Montaigne by
heart, and spoke with fluency the Spanish and Italian languages.

In her fifteenth year, the death of her parents left Ninon the
mistress of her own actions, with a fortune of ten thousand livres
per annum.

Her loveliness was then divine!  Her form was finely proportioned,
her complexion singularly delicate; her face was a fine oval, and
long dark lashes with drooping lids gave a charming softness to her
sparkling hazel eyes.  Her hair was a rich golden brown, and fell
about her neck in wavy profusion.  Her little nostrils, her rosy
mouth and chin were perfect!

In temper she was at times violent and imperious, and her disposition
had this peculiarity, that while even eager and lively about trifles
that affected herself, she was too often carelessly cold and
selfishly indifferent about all that concerned others.

She was born to be a coquette, and the spirit of gallantry, with the
desire to charm, win and enslave, pervaded her whole existence.  She
was the centre of Parisian fashion; lovers she had in plenty, and if
she desired to marry, some of the proudest titles in France were at
her disposal; but Ninon, whom her mother had destined for the service
of God, preferred a life of perfect freedom--such freedom as the days
of Louis "the Just" permitted, with independence and intrigue--to
live, not for others, but for herself alone.

We shall see how all this ended.

One night in the year 1633, she was seated alone in a room of her
house in the Rue de Parlement, behind the Palais-Royal.  Her lovers,
the Counts de Coligné and Jersey, and her favourite friends, the
Comtesse de la Suze, D'Olonne, and the Duchesse de Bouillon-Mancini,
the cripple Abbé Scarron, M. de Sévigné, and others, had all retired
and departed in their carriages or sedans, and Ninon was now seated
before a mirror in that famous boudoir, the walls of which, as
history tells us, were decorated with frescoes, that illustrated the
story of Cupid and Pysche.

Ninon was now only in her seventeenth year.  She observed that she
was very pale, that her round cheeks were colourless, and some
remarks made by the Abbé Scarron on the decay of youth, the fading of
beauty, the gradual advance of years, made the young girl thoughtful;
and she was too intelligent and too well-read to be without
reflection, so she thought of the _future_ with forebodings, for
already had late hours and gaiety robbed her of her roses.

Arrayed for conquest, who at that time could have competed with
Ninon?  Round her slender neck she wore the _collet-monti_, or
standing collar, which disappeared with Louis XIV.; her fine hair was
delicately sprinkled with perfumed maréchal powder; a kissing-patch,
like a tiny star, was in one of the dimples at the corner of her rosy
mouth, and her robe of silver gauze was looped in ample festoons, to
display the petticoat of crimson brocade beneath.

Would a time ever come when she would be covered with wrinkles, like
the Comtesse de la Suze, or when her most passionate lover, the gay
young English Count of Jersey* would weary of her?  Oh, _mon Dieu!_
it was not to be thought of with patience.


* William Villiers, Viscount Grandison, then known in France by that
title.


At that moment Guillot, her valet, tapped at the door of her boudoir.

"Who is there?" she asked, impatiently.

"A stranger, who would speak with you, mademoiselle," replied Guillot.

"A stranger, and at this hour!  What is his name?"

"He declines to give it."

"Ridiculous!  Is he armed?"

"No, mademoiselle."

"Is he young or handsome?"

"No, mademoiselle; he is very old and shabbily dressed."

"Then say I am ill, weary, busy, engaged with company, or what you
please, Guillot; only do not trouble me with him."

The valet bowed and retired, but soon returned.

"He says, mademoiselle, that he knows you are alone, that you are
neither ill nor weary, nor busy, for which reason he has chosen to
visit you at present.  That he has come from a long distance, and has
a secret of vast importance to communicate to you."

"A pertinacious old fool!" muttered Ninon; "but admit him."

The stranger entered, and with a cunning leer in his eyes surveyed
the chamber, particularly the frescoes of Cupid and Pysche, and then
they rested on Ninon, who for a moment, she knew not why, felt the
young blood curdle in her heart beneath his sparkling glance.

Her visitor was a little, decrepit old man with shrunken limbs.  His
coat and breeches, "a world too wide," were of black serge, and large
black japanned buckles covered three-fourths of his shoes.  He wore a
high conical hat with a very narrow brim.  This he removed on
entering, but still retained on his head an old-fashioned calotte cap
of black velvet, the lappets of which hung down by his withered
cheeks.

His appearance betokened extreme old age, but one that was healthy
and vigorous withal; for his eyes, which glittered and sometimes
_glared_ through his black horn spectacles, were wondrously large,
keen, and bright; and his hair, instead of being grey or thin, was
stuffed in masses, coal-black and coarse, under the calotte cap.

"Good evening, my dear Mademoiselle de L'Enclos," said this singular
little personage, with a blunt and familiar, but smiling nod.

"It is almost morning, monsieur," replied Ninon, with petulance; "the
clock of the Palais Royal has just struck midnight, so pray what is
your business with me at such an hour?"

"That you shall learn, mademoiselle, when your valet retires, but not
till then," replied the little man, with a withering glance at
Guillot.

Ninon was somewhat alarmed on hearing this; but being impelled by an
irresistible power, she made a sign to the wondering valet, who
withdrew and closed the door.  Then the quaint old man immediately
opened it, and on finding that Guillot lingered with an ear at the
keyhole, he gave him a glance so piercing, that he retired with
considerable precipitation.

"Now, monsieur, your business?" said Ninon.

"Were I young and handsome, like the Count de Jersey, perchance you
would be less impatient," replied the impudent old man, with a
horrible grin, while applying the forefinger of his right hand to the
side of his hooked nose, and winking one of his wicked eyes; "yet
confess, my beauty, that your heart sinks when you look on me?"

"It does," murmured Ninon, who felt, she knew not why, on the verge
of fainting, and fascinated by the dark stranger's glittering eyes.

"Be not alarmed," he resumed, blandly, and with an expression in
those serpent-like orbs that was _not_ a smile; "you have nothing to
fear from me--as yet."

"As yet!" repeated Ninon, breathlessly.

"Listen, mademoiselle," said he, striking his long silver-headed cane
on the floor; "you see before you one whom all mankind--yea, and
womankind, too--obey and fear; one whom Nature hath endowed with the
rare power of dispensing wondrous gifts.  I was present at your
birth----"

"You?"

"I; and from that hour I have watched your career, sedulously, and
with satisfaction, though unseen."

"This is folly or raving!" exclaimed Ninon, gathering courage, and
stretching out her beautiful hand towards a bell; but a sharp, fierce
glance from the old man's great goggle eyes restrained her, and she
said, gently, "What is your object?"

"To inquire what lot you wish for yourself in life."

"My present one is brilliant enough.  I have an income of ten
thousand livres, a house here in Paris, another at the Cordeliers, a
circle of delightful friends, and lovers in plenty."

"Friends change and lovers too; beauty fades, youth becomes age, and
age becomes wearisome and hideous."

"True; but I am only seventeen--for seventeen years more, at least, I
shall be beautiful."

"You will then be four-and-thirty, mademoiselle, when beauty begins
to fade and the ripe bloom of youth is past.  Then old age _will_
come, and that is what my friend De la Rochefoucault terms 'the
_hell_ of women.'

"Your object, I repeat, monsieur?" asked Ninon, glancing at the clock
and yawning without disguise.

"I come to give you the choice of three gifts; firstly, the highest
honours in France; secondly, splendid wealth; and thirdly, eternal
beauty.  The world does not possess another being who could make you
the same offers as I."

"You are either a quack or a fool," said Ninon, imperiously, as she
laid her hand on the bell to summon Guillot; but again the great eyes
of the quaint old man daunted her.

"Choose," said he, emphatically; "I have no time for trifling; rank,
wealth, or a beauty that shall endure without change for four score
years at least."

"Then give me the latter--eternal beauty, that I may have lovers and
adorers for ever," said Ninon, laughing; "but pray, my dear old man,
how is such a gift to be acquired?"

"By yourself, mademoiselle; it is very simple.  Write your name with
your own lovely hand, in this book; swear to me secrecy for life, and
the thing is done."

He bowed, and advancing, laid before her a very handsome pocket-book,
bound in scarlet, and richly gilt.

Ninon, heedless of the matter, and neither believing in, nor caring
for his assumed powers, laughingly gave the promise he required, and
wrote her name in his tablets, which he instantly closed, and
consigned to his deep breeches pocket.

"Now, mademoiselle," said the little man, with a chuckle and a
grimace, as he waved his hands towards her, "receive the power of
possessing eternal beauty, the power of controlling every heart, and
being beloved for long, long years, after all who know and love you
now are consigned to the silent tomb."

"_All?_" said Ninon, almost sadly, as she thought of the Count de
Jersey, while a strange thrill passed over all her body, and a
sensation like the pricking of needles.  Recovering herself, however,
she said, with a pouting lip, "Monsieur, you jest."

"That is not my habit," responded the old man, with a wicked grin;
"but when I do jest, few laugh at me, even in Paris, which I can
remember when celebrated for the extreme gravity of its inhabitants."

"When was this?"

"In the days of my friend Julian the apostate, who says, in his
amusing book, the 'Misopognon,' that he loves our dear Parisians on
account of their _gravity_."

"Who are you that say such things, and pretend to so much power?"
asked Ninon, with displeasure.

"I am one who has known this lower world, its heartlessness and
trickery, its crooked ways and its wickedness, for exactly six
thousand years, six months, fourteen days, eleven hours, and
fifty-five minutes--the clock of the Palais Royal is ten minutes
fast, mademoiselle.  Adieu; I shall keep faith with you.  Your beauty
shall last as I have said, and we shall meet _twice_ again."

"When?"

"Once at your house of the Cordeliers, and again in Paris, during the
next century."

"The _next_ century!" repeated Ninon, with a laugh; "and this is but
1633."

"Exactly--adieu, mademoiselle," and placing his conical hat jauntily
on one side of his moplike head of coarse black hair, the old man put
his cane under his arm and bowed himself out.

How the enchanting Ninon slept that night we have no means of
knowing.  In the morning she would have deemed the whole affair a
dream, but for the solemn and reiterated assertions of her valet, who
had ushered in the nocturnal visitor; and a dream she might
ultimately have thought it, had she not found that, beyond all doubt,
as years rolled on, as her young companions became old, faded, and
withered, and were gathered to the tomb, she still remained youthful,
blooming, full of health and spirit, and the possessor of unimpaired
loveliness.

The Count de Jersey joined King Charles I., and died in 1643 of a
wound received at the siege of Bristol.  But the heartless Ninon soon
forgot him, and others supplied his place.

Louis XIII. and Cardinal Richelieu were taken to their last home;
Louis XIV. succeeded--the Augustan age of France--the age which gave
her such soldiers as Turenne and Condé, such literati as Racine,
Corneille, and Molière, such orators as Massillon, Bossuet, and
Lamothe Fénélon, and which saw the exiled Stuarts repining at St.
Germain; but still Ninon was young and lovely.  She sedulously
cultivated the fashions of each age, and wore the extreme of the
mode--from the starched ruff of Louis the Thirteenth's time, to the
_coiffure à la giraffe_--the towering head-dresses of the early part
of the eighteenth century.

As Le Sage says of Donna Inesilla (under which name he introduces
Ninon in his novel of "Gil Blas") "she had been idolized by the
noblemen of the old court, and saw herself adored by those of the
new.  Time, that spares not even beauty, had exerted itself upon hers
in vain; he could not deprive her of the power to please, and a noble
air, an enchanting wit, and graces that were peculiar to her, made
her inspire men with passion, even in her old age."

So was it with Ninon, save that her beauty never decayed.

In her fifty-sixth year she was residing in her little country villa
at the Cordeliers.  It was delightfully situated, and was surrounded
by a beautiful landscape, and there she usually spent the months of
summer.  During this year she had also spent the autumn there, to
avoid a young cavalier, who had followed her constantly about the
streets and public places of Paris, and whose attentions thus had
caused her serious annoyance--all the more, perhaps, that the young
man seemed somewhat poor, though very handsome and extremely
well-bred.

One evening Ninon was alone.  She was reading "Les Amours du Grand
Alcandre," under which name her father's comrade, the gay Maréchal
Duc de Bassompierre, narrated some of the love affairs of Henri
Quatre, when her page, the grandson of Guillot, announced that a
gentleman in black, who would not give his name, desired to speak
with her.

She instantly thought of the mysterious visitor of 1633, and
tremblingly said that he might be admitted.  Contrary to her
expectation, there entered a very handsome young man, about
four-and-twenty years of age, dressed in a black velvet suit, slashed
with white satin, and wearing a steel-hilted rapier slung in a white
silk scarf.  He knelt before her, and the volume of Bassompierre fell
from her hand when she recognised the unknown lover who had followed
her like her shadow about the streets of Paris.

"Monsieur," said she, "you weary me!  What is the object of your
visit--and what is your name?"

"Mademoiselle," said he, in trembling accents, and with a flushing
cheek, "I am the Chevalier Guillaume de Villiers."

At this name Ninon started and grew deadly pale.

"A lieutenant in the regiment of Artois?" she asked.

"The same, madame; but how know you that?"

"It matters not how; but proceed."

"I was severely wounded when Turenne forced the Spanish lines at
Arras, and again on our retreat from Valenciennes, by the ball of an
arquebuss.  The viscount sent me on leave to Paris.  There I saw you,
mademoiselle, and have dared to--to love you in secret--to love you
passionately!"

Ninon, who had been regarding the speaker with mournful interest, now
arose and sprang back in dismay; for this Chevalier de Villiers--this
handsome young man, so pale, so sad, and gentle-eyed, was no other
than her own son, whom since his birth she had secluded in the
provinces; who never knew either his mother, or his father--the Count
de Jersey; and who now by a strange fatality, in ignorance of their
relationship, had fallen madly in love with her!

Then followed that terrible episode which is so powerfully reproduced
in "Gil Blas."

Perceiving her confusion, and being dazzled by her marvellous beauty,
the young officer took her hands in his, and covered them with
kisses; but Ninon started back, and exclaimed--

"Beware, rash boy, and listen to me!"  Then pointing to the clock on
the mantel-piece, she added, "Look there! at this very hour,
four-and-twenty years ago, I was secretly delivered of you, Guillaume
de Villiers, in this very chamber.  _I am your mother!_"*


* This episode is mentioned in the "Memoirs of Ninon de l'Enclos," 2
vols.; published in 1776.  The story of her compact with Satan is an
old legend of Paris.


Abashed and terrified, filled with mortification and shame--after a
terrible pause--the young man drew his long rapier; and ere Ninon
could conceive or arrest his purpose, he placed the hilt on the
floor, and sprung upon the blade, which passed through his heart, and
killed him on the spot.

Inspired with horror by this sudden catastrophe, Ninon clung to the
mantel-piece; but a loud chuckling laugh made her look up,--and lo!

At one of the open windows of her chamber there stood a little old
man clad in sad coloured garments of an antique fashion; his
shock-head of black hair was surmounted by a conical hat, which he
waggishly wore very much on one side, and he was sucking the silver
knob of his cane.  Through his round horn spectacles his eyes glared
on Ninon with a malignant smile she had no difficulty in remembering.
He made her a low ironical bow, and hobbled away with another
chuckling laugh which made her blood curdle.

Her lively nature survived even this shock!  She returned to her
house near the Palais Royal, and amid the gaieties of Paris, and her
circle of friends and admirers, among whom were some of the greatest
wits in Paris, such as Rochefoucault, St. Evremond, La Bruyere, and
others--a circle that was ever being renewed, she soon forgot the
doubly horrid episode of her house at the Cordeliers.

Christina, Queen of Sweden, became one of her friends when at Paris,
and was so charmed by her conversation, that at parting she declared
to the whole court that she had "never met with any woman in France
to compare with the illustrious Ninon."  The latter was in her
sixty-fifth year when the famous General Sir John Banier (the comrade
of Gustavus Adolphus), who fought at Magdeburg and Leipzig, threw
himself at her feet, as the poor Chevalier de Villiers and many more
had done; but Ninon only laughed, and said--

"My dear general, you will find that it requires more genius to make
love than to make war."

So time passed on, and, as I have said, at the age of fourscore Ninon
was still to all appearance young, and so charming, that the Abbé
Gedoine, a youth of twenty, who had fluttered about her house in the
Rue de Parlement, became madly in love with her; but Ninon was tiring
now of lovers, and even of life itself.

"Ah, Ninon," said the abbé, "love has too long been alike your
amusement and your occupation."

"My dear abbé," she replied, "the most brief follies are the best.  I
perceive now, when it is somewhat too late, that it was an absurd
step in me to accept of you as an admirer.  Let us carry the frolic
no farther, but fairly quit each other this instant; and for the term
of our natural lives."

Thus, after inspiring a youth of twenty with a real passion for her,
was Ninon, in her eightieth year, the first to break off from him.
In short, from her first boy-lover, the Count de Coligni, when she
was only seventeen, to the advent of the Abbé Gedoine, her long life
had been a succession of conquests.

In the first days of October, 1706, an illness of a kind so peculiar
that it baffled the best physicians in Paris--a languor, wasting and
helplessness fell upon Ninon, but amid it she looked lovelier than
ever, though she was then ninety years and five months old!

In succession had the doctors come and gone, surprised and bewildered
by a malady for which they had neither a name nor a remedy.  At last
there came one whom no one knew, and who requested to see Ninon alone.

He was a decrepit, but hale little man, very old apparently, though
his hair was coal-black.  He wore a dark suit, an absurd conical hat,
and large horn spectacles, and leaned on a silver-headed cane, which
at every pace he planted firmly on the pavement, as if he had a very
good opinion of himself.  In his left hand he carried a pocket-book
of scarlet morocco, richly gilt--doubtless his book of pharmacy.

Propped upon a pillow, the dying Ninon--for she _was_ dying
now--regarded him with an awful expression in her hollow eyes.

"Do you remember _me_, madame?" he was heard to say, by those who
loitered or listened without.

"But too well," moaned the patient.

"Yet fair ladies have often brief memories."

"And I have been your dupe!  Begone, fiend--you are powerless, and I
defy you!"

The old man uttered his chuckling laugh.

"Begone, I say, to that hell from hence you have come."

"Then I go not alone!" was the strange response, and there rung
through the chamber a shriek of agony, and with it mingled the
strange demoniac laughter of the little man in black.  The listeners
heard also the stamping of his feet, and exclamations of rage; then
all became still--terribly _still_.

When the door, which had hitherto defied their efforts to force it,
was opened, the stranger could nowhere be found; he had disappeared,
hat, stick, spectacles and all; but they found Ninon, and she was no
more.

The coverlet and other clothes were disordered, the silk hangings
torn; the bed bore evidence that a fierce struggle had taken place;
but great was the astonishment of all on beholding the rapid change
that came over her remains, even while they gazed on them.

They were no longer those of the seeming young and lovely beauty they
had known so long, but were turning fast into those of an extremely
aged person.  The oval face became haggard; the smooth forehead a
mass of wrinkles; the pearly teeth disappeared; the lovely tresses of
silky brown turned into a few white straggling hairs, and the plump
pretty hands became shrivelled and yellow.

Thus within one minute the remains of the once enchanting Ninon
turned into those of an old--hideously old--woman, who had died of
strangulation, for on her withered neck remained several marks, made
by the ferocious clutch of that black stranger, who could never more
be traced.

This was on the evening of the 17th of October, 1706.




CHAPTER XII.

DISCOVERED.

I had been disguised us a _soubrette_ for five days when those
terrible events, by which I lost my love, and nearly my life, and had
to leave the chateau, occurred in rapid succession.

On the evening after we had listened to the story of Ninon, I was
seated with Jacqueline in a secluded bower of the garden.  The
atmosphere was oppressively warm, and I had removed alike the large
linen cap and the false curls with which Angelique had supplied me;
thus, unfortunately, no one who saw me could for a moment have
doubted the sex of Basile, the sham paysanne from the Morbihan.

Jacqueline reclined with her head upon my shoulder, and while seated
hand in hand, I was speaking of the apparent hopelessness of our
future, when she interrupted me by saying,

"Remember, Basil, that at our age nothing is hopeless either in
fortune or in love."

"True," I repeated, tremulously, while gazing tenderly into her clear
and beautiful eyes; "yet, ere I saw you, love Jacqueline, at times I
was already sick of life."

"Sick of life!  Your world in England must be a horrid place, if
people weary of it so soon."

"You mistake me.  Every heart, as I said to your aunt the other
night, has some secret sorrow, and I have mine--a lost position.
Bravely did I bear the cross till I was taken prisoner----"

"Do you deem yourself such?"

"I mean till I was left here, abandoned in hostile France, thus
crushing all the brilliant schemes I had formed for the future."

"Enter the service of France.  I have vast interest through my
father, through my cousin Bourgneuf, and the Comte de Boisguiller.
Who can say how high you may rise?  We have still our Irish Brigade
and the regiment of Royal Scots, and to be a Scotsman is still a
passport to royal favour in France."

"Was, Jacqueline; you should say it _was_.  But that day has gone for
ever, nor would such views suit me if it remained.  I thank you, my
beloved, but this can never be."

A sound as of steps among the shrubbery close by made us pause, and
then Jacqueline, after looking hastily round, asked--

"Is the chateau becoming so terrible to you?"

"Ah! do not ask me that, at least in such a tone of pique.  With you
I should indeed be happy anywhere."

"Should be--are you not?"

"I _am_ happy."

"Then whence this repining, Basil?" she asked, softly, perhaps
reproachfully.

"Understand me; it is the ever present question, where will the love
I bear you--a love so deep and desperate--end?  Would it not have
been better that we had never known and never loved each other so?"

"Why, Basil, why?"

"You are the daughter of a peer of France, the Maréchal de Broglie;
I--oh, Heaven! you know me but as an unfortunate gentleman--a poor
private dragoon.  I have not even an epaulette to boast of!"

"Then I shall give you _two_," said Jacqueline, putting a white hand
on each of my shoulders, and kissing me playfully on the check.

"_Mon Dieu_, it is too much!" exclaimed a piercing voice; the hands
of Jacqueline were torn away, and Madame de Bourgneuf, in all the
rage of offended virtue, dignity, and nobility, stood with pallid
face and flashing eyes before us.  "So, so, this is Basile, the
paysanne from the Morbihan!  A man, a heretic, a foreigner, a soldier
in the arms of my niece, of Mademoiselle de Broglie!  Oh, what horror
is this!" she almost screamed aloud.

The rustling in the shrubbery is quite accounted for now, thought I.
But I was wrong, for keener eyes might have detected the figure of a
man--of Theophile Hautois--lurking like a panther near us.

Jacqueline covered her eyes with one hand, and clung by the other to
the side of the arbour.  Indeed, had I not supported her she would
have fallen, and now there ensued a long and most painful pause,
during which I prayed the earth to open and swallow me.

I was thunderstruck, and poor Jacqueline, overwhelmed by dismay and
shame, cowered upon the seat with her sweet face hidden by her hands.
Presence of mind alone could save us now.  I waited until the first
paroxysm of anger was past, and then addressed the too justly
offended countess.

Heaven only knows what I said then, but love for poor Jacqueline and
the desperation of my own plight lent me eloquence; thus rapidly and
briefly I related all my story since the morning on which I had saved
her life in the mulberry wood near the well by the wayside that led
to our camp at Paramé, down to the present hour.  Madame acknowledged
that she had overheard enough to convince her that I loved her niece
with respect and tenderness, but added almost fiercely that the vast
gulf opened by our difference of position rendered that love a
madness and a crime.

I acknowledged all this, and in terms that I cannot now recal, urged
for the preservation of her family honour and her own high name, the
policy of preserving secrecy in the affair; and she evidently felt
the force of my argument, as it was a circumstance which would
seriously embroil her with her brother the Maréchal, her son the
Count de Bourgneuf, and perhaps with French society in general;
though as a Frenchwoman she felt that she could almost forgive
anything that had love for an excuse.  After a time, I begged her to
remember that I was an _Ecossais_, and besought her by the memory of
the olden time, and her own early predilections, to pardon
Jacqueline, if not me, for all that had passed.

This was assailing madame's weak point, and a hectic flush crossed
the pale cheek of Jacqueline, as, no doubt, she thought of "the
handsome Scottish Captain of milord Clare's Dragoons," of whom we
heard so much every evening.

"_Très bien, monsieur_; am I then to understand that you are
Scottish?" said she, in a gentler tone.

"I am, Madame.  Let your favour for one whom you have so often said
was dear to you--a soldier of fortune--plead for me now."

"'Tis well that this _malheur_ has occurred here at my sequestered
house, and not at the Hotel de Broglie in the Rue St. Dominique at
Paris: but let that pass.  We Bretons love the Scots as the friends
of our forefathers in the olden time, and we all know that it was to
the love of a young Scottish girl our brave Du Guay Trouin owed his
escape from an English prison, and that in her arms he died in 1736.*
But this painful matter must be ended, and a convent may cure
mademoiselle of an infatuation which degrades her.  To drive _you_,
monsieur, from the chateau--"


* A love for the Scots and dislike for their fellow-subjects still
exist in Brittany.  See "Wanderings" there, published by Bentley,
1860, &c.


"The fate I own, with all humility, I deserve."

"Would be to ensure your death: but mademoiselle my niece has acted
most unwisely--even culpably--in not confiding in me; and now you
must be separated, and for ever."

"Alas, madame!----"

"This absurd disguise, monsieur, must be relinquished, and to have
you sent at once from hence in safety, if it can be accomplished,
shall now be my task."

"I submit to your decision, madame," said I, with a sinking heart.
"Deep affection causes deep submission, and to love so fondly as I
do, often causes more sorrow than joy.  Dear, dear Jacqueline!"

"Enough of this!" interrupted Madame de Bourgneuf, loftily and
severely, "Retire to your room, monsieur.  When next I see you, let
it be in the attire of your sex, and dearly shall that minx Angelique
pay for her share in this deplorable--this most unfortunate affair."

I bowed and retired, feeling in my heart that Madame de Bourgneuf
treated me with great leniency, and such as I did not deserve; for
she might have summoned her servants, and had me hanged on the
nearest tree, had such been her will and pleasure.

I paused at the end of the garden-walk, and looked back to the
rose-covered bower.  The countess was regarding me with a fixed and
stern expression; but Jacqueline, unseen by her, waved her hand to me
sadly in adieu.  My soul was wrung--if I may use such an
expression--wrung with agony for the unmerited shame thus brought on
one who loved me so well, who was so tender and so true; and I cursed
my own selfishness.

I bowed in return, and hurried towards the chateau.  Alas! that
farewell glance was the last we were doomed to see of each other as
lovers.




CHAPTER XIII.

SUSPENSE.

I have but little courage to write of what followed this upbraiding
interview and degrading discovery; for one episode of horror followed
another.

I resumed the green hunting suit of the absent count, and Angelique
was filled with dismay when she saw me clad in it, as she dreaded the
punishment that would be awarded for her connivance in the recent
masquerading; and moreover she loved her young mistress dearly.  Then
she wept when she found it was ordained that I was to depart secretly
that night on horseback, and that it was to be given out that Basile
the paysanne from the Morbihan, had eloped or run away.

I was to be the bearer of a special letter from madame to the Comte
de Boisguiller, Governor of St. Malo, charging him by his old
allegiance to her, and his present friendship, to have me despatched
on board the first British ship that came in sight of the city, or
sent by an especial boat to the Isle of Jersey: in short, to get me
out of the province at all hazards, and quietly too.

It occurred to me that the count might neither seek a ship nor send a
boat, but instead of obeying his venerable inamorata, might cast me
into a vault at St. Malo as a prisoner; however, I felt so crushed,
so crestfallen and miserable by the sudden, though not unexpected
turn the matter had taken, that for a long time after these events I
cared very little what became of me.

The evening drew on, and twilight deepened into night.  Then Madame
de Bourgneuf, on inquiring for her niece, found that she was not
within the chateau; on this she had the great bell rung repeatedly to
summon her from the garden or grounds; but it rang in vain, for there
was no appearance of our Jacqueline.  After this the countess sent
for me, and addressing me sternly, said--

"Monsieur, my letter for M. le Comte de Boisguiller is here, ready
written and sealed, the horse which is to bear you to St. Malo is
ready in the stable, saddled and bridled, but you shall not pass the
gate of Bourgneuf until mademoiselle returns to her apartment.  Do
you understand me?"

"I beseech you, madame----"

"Beseech me not!" she interrupted, sharply.  "There is some other
trick--some vile plot in this prolonged absence at an hour so
unusual, and on the eve of your departure, too; so I shall keep you
as a hostage for her."

But as the first hours of this anxious night drew on, the surprise of
the countess and her household took the new phase of alarm and fear,
a feeling that was quickened by my repeated assurances of ignorance,
and my too evident deep anxiety.  The avenue of yew and orange-trees,
the lawn and its shrubbery, the borders of the lake, the garden, the
labyrinth, and every room, turret, and corner of the chateau, were
rigidly searched without success, for no trace of the missing one was
found, till Urbain the gardener picked up, near the door of the bower
in which we had been seated when madame discovered us, a small kid
glove and a gold bracelet, which we knew belonged to Jacqueline.

Near these, on a bush, were some fragments of lace torn from her
dress; and when inspected by lantern light the garden-walk and border
bore evidence of a struggle; the flowers were crushed and bushes
torn, and in the earth were the deep footmarks of a man who wore
sabots.

About ten yards from the bower we found a small axe, which had been
lost or cast away.  It was such as woodmen generally used, and cut
upon the handle, appeared the name of T. HAUTOIS!

The deductions we drew from these traces and indications filled my
soul with the keenest alarm and horror!

* * * * *

That Jacqueline had been violently assaulted, carried off, and
perhaps killed ruthlessly by this outlaw, who had so long vowed
vengeance on her family, and whom Jacquot and I had both seen lurking
in the grounds during the past week, seemed beyond all doubt.  Of his
extreme cunning, ingenuity, and of the length his daring and
brutality could carry him, I had already had ample proof, and my
heart sickened as imagination pictured the gentle, soft, and
delicately nurtured Jacqueline, writhing and helpless in his felon
hands.

The lamentations of Angelique and the female domestics were mingled
with the oaths and maledictions of the men, who proceeded at once to
arm themselves with muskets and pistols; and now it was that Madame
de Bourgneuf, in her despair, was disposed to rely on me.

She pressed my hand in hers, and said, in a broken voice--

"Monsieur, if you ever loved my niece, as you say you do, aid in her
rescue from this demon!"

I returned the pressure in silence, and was making preparation to
scour the roads and thickets which covered all the district, when,
amid our consternation, the tramp of horses was heard, and the
Chevalier de Boisguiller, accompanied by twelve hussars, rode
hurriedly up to the gate.

The countess was standing on the front door-steps of the chateau,
pale, trembling, and her eyes red with weeping.  Some ten men,
including Urbain, the valets, gardeners, and grooms, stood around
her, loading their arms, fixing and snapping their flints and
lighting torches and lanterns, for darkness had long since set
completely in.

The Chevalier dismounted, threw his bridle-reins to a hussar, and
advancing to the countess, said, with a smiling bow--

"_Peste!_ but I seem to have come at a critical time, madame.  Has
the lake been poached--the hen-roost robbed, or what, that you are
preparing to take the field like a chatelaine of old?"

"Oh, chevalier, you have indeed come at a most critical time.  Heaven
itself must have sent you!"

"Not at all," replied the heedless hussar.  "I am such a sad dog that
I fear Heaven has long since given me up as incorrigible, but I have
been sent here by order of the count, my father, with a sergeant and
twelve troopers.  You must learn, that on the day I had last the
honour to visit you, a letter came to the commandant of St. Malo--a
private letter, oddly spelled, on a very crumpled piece of paper, and
bearing the feigned signature of Theophile Damien, but bringing
information that an English spy was secreted _here_.  So, as duty
compelled the count to see into the matter, and friendship urged that
he should spare you an affront, he despatched me to make the
necessary inquiries.  Now I remember me of a soubrette of my
cousin's----"

"Monsieur le Chevalier," said the poor countess, speaking rapidly
amid a torrent of tears, "the person of whom you speak is no spy--for
that you have my word of honour."

The chevalier bowed low, with his right hand on his heart, accepting
the pledge for me.

"He is no spy, and must be protected.  He it was who saved the life
of Jacqueline, and will peril his life with you to save her once
again, if indeed it be not too late already."

"Again--too late--what do you mean?"

"She means, chevalier," said I, "that Mademoiselle Jacqueline has
been torn from us by a ruffian of the most daring and unscrupulous
character--by Hautois, the galley-slave."

"Hautois!" repeated the chevalier, with indescribable alarm.

"By Hautois, and thus your arrival is most opportune.  I am the
person referred to in your orders; but for Heaven's sake--for the
sake of Mademoiselle Jacqueline, waste no time or thought on me.  I
will assist you, aid you with my life to save, to rescue her, and
after that is achieved, deal with me as you will."

For a full minute the Frenchman seemed to lose his invincible
self-possession on hearing all this, but in a few words I acquainted
him with what had occurred, and urged the necessity of immediate
action.  On hearing the name of Hautois, with whose story he was
familiar, the chevalier changed colour, and appeared much disturbed
and alarmed.

"If 'tis he, we have indeed no time to lose," said he, through his
clenched teeth; "but the pursuit must be on horseback--the servants
can beat the woods, while my hussars shall scour the roads.  You
ride, monsieur, I presume?"

Under other circumstances I might have smiled at the question, but
then I simply replied in the affirmative.

"_Bon!_ then get a horse from the stables, and let us begone."

In a few minutes our plan was detailed, and we all separated,
inspired by anxiety and excitement.  Three hussars took the road
towards Dinan; three towards St. Paul le Plenguen; three on that
which led to Montford, and other three on that which led towards
Rennes.  The armed servants under Urbain the gardener and the porter,
who had been once a soldier, proceeded to search the woods and
forests, while the chevalier and I departed at a gallop towards St.
Aubin du Cormier, stopping for inquiry every person we met on the
road.

The chateau was to be our point of rendezvous.

"Save her--bring her home in safety," were the parting words of the
countess, "and I vow to God to hang a silver lamp worth a thousand
livres on the altar at Roscoff!"

This was a little chapel near Leon in Brittany, built by Mary Queen
of Scots, in memory of her landing there during a storm when on her
voyage from Scotland to France.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE BLOODHOUND.

"When nothing remains of an adventure," writes some one, "it is
always possible to consider it a dream."  As yet I could not realize
this, though frequently asking of myself, Is all this sudden calamity
a truth?--for I thought, spoke, and acted as one who dreamed.

But three hours--they seemed so many ages--but three hours ago, I had
been seated in yonder garden-bower with Jacqueline, listening to her
voice, while her cheek reclined upon my shoulder, fearing nothing
save the shadowy future, thinking of ourselves and of our love alone.

_Now_ how all was changed!

I had been discovered, and all but expelled from the chateau, while
she had been abducted, and by such an abductor!  Now I was riding
side by side with a French officer--his comrade for the time--and he
was that Chevalier de Boisguiller, who had been so long my _bête
noire_.

At the very moment I was thinking of all these things, what might be
the peril, the suffering, the desperate extremity of Jacqueline!
Where was she, and how circumstanced in the power of a brutal
galley-slave?  Might we not be riding in the wrong direction, and
thus, perhaps, abandoning her to the very fate from which we sought
to save her?  The stars that looked so brightly down on us looked
also down on her; but where was she?  Every thought and fear was
maddening!

When contrasted with my own keen anxiety, the _sang-froid_ of the
French officer piqued and annoyed me.  It was well for me, however,
that he was ignorant of the relation that existed between his cousin
and me, as, apart from any fancy he might himself have had for her,
in the extreme ideas of difference of rank, religion, and so forth,
cherished by the French _noblesse_, he would have thought no more of
quietly pistolling me, on the score of presumption, than of shooting
a weasel.  Thus my ill-concealed emotions he put down in his own mind
as the result of humanity and gratitude.

"_Mon ami_, I rather like you," said he, as we rode on together; "I
can see that you are courageous, and that is better than to be merely
brave."

"Merely brave--what do you mean, chevalier?"

"We French make a distinction in this matter.  A soldier may be very
brave, and yet on some occasions may not have courage to manifest his
bravery."

"I confess that this paradox is too subtle for me, especially at such
a time.  But tell me, chevalier, was this wretch of whom we are in
pursuit ever in the French service?"

"I regret to say that he was, until discharged with a _cartouche
jaune_ as an incorrigible rogue."

He referred to the discharge printed on yellow paper and given to
those men of the French army who were dismissed under sentence of
degradation.

For a few miles we diverged into every cross path, but always
returned to the main road; and we questioned closely the few persons,
chiefly charcoal-burners, whom in that sequestered region we met
abroad at such an hour, but questioned them in vain.

Thus the short night of August was soon spent.  The clear stars still
shone brightly in the blue sky; but already there were indications of
the dawn that was at hand, for a warm flush was stealing over the
east when we found ourselves at Fougères, a little town situated on
the river Nanson, having some leather manufactories and a strong old
castle wherein the lords of that _Seigneurie_ resided.

There we turned our horses without prosecuting our inquiries, as it
was by no means likely that those of whom we were in search would be
found in a busy town.

So the night had passed away--a night without tidings of Jacqueline!

Broader and deeper grew the light of morning, and clouds of sombre
grey or purple that overhung the mountains and seemed to roll along
their distant ridges, became lighted up and edged with saffron and
gold.

We were returning at a canter along the highway to Bourgneuf, in the
hope that on reaching that place we might find that some of our
searchers had returned with happy tidings and better success than
ourselves; but we had scarcely proceeded two miles when we met Urbain
the gardener and Bertrand the porter, each armed with a musket.  They
were accompanied by an old peasant, whose head was bound about with a
cloth to conceal a wound, which seemed to have bled profusely.

They had been scouting in the woodlands which bordered the highway,
and had there met this peasant, who was a woodcutter, and who
informed them that he had seen a man dragging a woman towards the
forest of St. Aubin du Cormier, and that when attempting to interfere
when she claimed his succour and protection, her captor struck him
down with the butt of a heavy pistol.  This rencontre occurred about
three miles from the place where we were then speaking.

"_Pardieu!_ this is valuable intelligence," exclaimed Boisguiller;
"but how shall we track them through these dense thickets?"

"Monsieur, you cannot do it on horseback," replied the peasant; "but
as my hut is close by, you may leave your horses there, and then, as
I should like to repay that cowardly rascal for the tap he gave me on
the head, I shall give you sure means of tracking him, for I have in
keeping a Spanish bloodhound belonging to Monseigneur the Count of
Fougères, and it is completely at your service."

"I thank you for this great aid, _mon ami_," said my companion; "the
count knows me well--I am the Chevalier de Boisguiller, son of the
Governor of St. Malo."

On hearing this the peasant made a succession of low bows, scraping
the turf with his sabots at each.

The reader may imagine the haste and satisfaction with which we
availed ourselves of the offer of the old woodman, and as we
proceeded to his humble hut, which was situated close to a bend of
the Nanson, I questioned him closely and anxiously about the
appearance of the persons he had seen.  The tall, powerful man in a
common blouse and fur cap, with a girdle and _couteau de chasse_, was
as certainly Theophile Hautois as the poor pale girl with torn dress
and dishevelled hair, whose hands he had tied with a cord, and whose
mouth he had gagged with a handkerchief, was certainly our Jacqueline.

His description made me tremble with anguish and rage, and
Boisguiller to gnaw the ends of his moustaches.  We quitted our
saddles, stuck our pistols in our girdles, and had the bloodhound
brought forth.

"Messieurs," said the woodman, as he led forward the dog by a strong
steel chain, "there is not in France, and certainly not in Bretagne
or Normandy, a _limier_ with a finer nose than this; and set him but
once upon the track of those we seek--let the distance between us be
ever so great, and let it be through the thickest woods and by the
most covert paths--ay, _pardieu_, by the Blackwater of St. Aubin du
Cormier, this dog will trace them."

"To the proof, without delay!" exclaimed the chevalier, while I
examined attentively the ferocious brute on whose instincts our hopes
depended.

Its back was about thirty inches high, its limbs exhibited vast
muscle, and its chaps were long, pendulous, and frothy.  It was of a
deep dark-brown hue, and was of that breed which the Spaniards once
used with such terrible effect on the continent and adjacent isles of
South America.

Leaving our horses at the hut, we retraced our steps, and entering
the wild forest, which more or less covers all that part of the
country, an hour's walk brought us to the place where the woodman had
encountered Hautois and his victim about seven hours before--at
midnight, in fact, and he assured us of the place by showing on the
grass traces of the blood which had flowed from the wound inflicted
by the outlaw's pistol-butt.

The fierce hound inserted his square muzzle among the grass and
sniffed up blood, on which the peasant gave him a kick, saying,

"_Voila, mon ami!_--come, come, 'tis not my blood we wish you to
sniff at so pleasantly, but the blood of another."

"True," said Boisguiller, "but how are we to give him the scent of
Hautois, or of the lady?"

"Morbleu!" grumbled the woodman; "I did not think of that."

"Had we but a piece of mademoiselle's dress!" said Urbain.

"Here are what we require," said I, in a voice all but breathless
with emotion, while drawing from my breast the kid glove and fragment
of lace which we had found near the garden-bower.  The chevalier gave
me a keen glance, and snatching the relics almost abruptly from my
hand, pressed them against the black nostrils of the dog, patting him
soothingly the while.  The glove was perfumed fortunately, and thus,
in a minute or less, the dog, after sniffing and snorting about among
the grass, with his head bent low and ears drooping, began to run
rapidly through the forest, straining on his collar and chain, and
dragging after him the peasant who grasped the other end of it.

"_Parbleu, messieurs!_ he is on the track now!  See how he follows
the scent!" exclaimed the old man, who was compelled to run fast to
keep up with the dog and with us.  "Oh! by St. Malo!  See, here are
the footsteps, the crushed leaves, the broken twigs!  'Tis this way
they have passed, messieurs.  _Ah! sacré coquin!_ That tap on the
head shall cost thee dear.  Look to your pistols, monsieur le
chevalier, for _he_ has a pair, and I know not the moment we may come
upon him."

Thus surely guided by the searching instinct and unflinching
pertinacity of the hound, we hastened through the forest in silence,
and with hearts full of intense anxiety and hope.

The dog was sometimes at fault when runnels of water crossed our
path, but the peasant, who was an acute old fellow, with a face of
the true Breton type--eyes that were deeply set and thoughtful, a
high nose and square forehead--soon set him right again.

What must poor Jacqueline, so delicate and so tenderly nurtured, have
suffered while forced to pursue such paths as these?  We were now at
least eight miles distant from Bourgneuf, and for her to have been
dragged through a forest at midnight, and by such hands!

The idea was too dreadful to embody in fancy, so let me hasten over
what follows.

At a part of the forest which was so dense that the intertwined
branches of the trees almost excluded the light of the sun, the dog
stopped at the root of a large elm, and began to bay loudly over some
tufts of grass, leaves, and branches that were freshly heaped up
there.  He snorted, growled savagely, and then proceeded to tear up
the little mound with his nose and forepaws.

"The scent ends here," said the peasant, looking somewhat bewildered
and alarmed.

"There must be some mistake," said the chevalier, with annoyance in
his tone; "we have been in pursuit of the wrong person.  But some
mystery may be concealed here.  Urbain, Bertrand, scrape aside this
heap, and let us see what the dog's nose has discovered."

They readily plied their musket-butts, and then their hands, while I
stood by, feeling more dead than alive, for the horror of
anticipation overcame me.

A bit of an orange silk dress appeared.  Let me endeavour to write
briefly and calmly of what followed.

In a hollow, a hasty grave, half dug and half heaped up, about three
feet deep in all, we found the body of Jacqueline, covered by leaves,
branches, and tufts of grass.

She lay upon her back; her right hand, so small and beautiful,
clutched a tuft of grass; the teeth were clenched--there was no
relaxation of the jaw--clenched as if with agony, and foam was
plainly discernible on the white and parted lips; yet she was lovely
like a dead angel, and all the divine serenity of innocence was there.

Standing aloof like one transfixed or petrified, I saw them raise her
up, and saw her head drooping pendulously backward with its long
dishevelled hair clotted with blood, the bare bosom and the tattered
dress.

Then I heard Boisguiller exclaim in accents of horror,

"She is dead now; but that mere wound could never have killed
her--_she has been, stunned and buried alive_!  Poor Jacqueline!
What she has endured ere death released her, her lips can never tell
us now."




CHAPTER XV.

THE FOREST OF ST. AUBIN DU CORMIER.

When my thoughts took some coherence again, evening had come on, and
I found myself alone and still in a forest--alone with the
bloodhound, whose steel chain I grasped with an unyielding hand.

I heard the rising wind shaking the tops of the lofty oaks.  I
remembered now, like one who, after a long and deep slumber, recals
the passages of a dream, that near the tree beneath which we found
_her_, Urbain the gardener had picked up a fur cap, which I had no
difficulty in recognising as one that had been worn by Hautois.

This furnished the dog with a scent, put us on his track, and the
livelong day we had followed it, like Indians on the trail of an
enemy.

One by one, Guillaume de Boisguiller, Urbain the gardener, Bertrand,
the old porter, the peasant, and others, had dropped behind in
weariness; but I, taking the dog in hand, inspired and endued by
revenge with thrice my natural strength, had urged the pursuit alone,
through wild thickets, up rough ravines, and across streams and
torrents, while a pale face, in awful repose, with eyes glazed and
half open, and a mouth the lips of which were two blue lines, seemed
to lead me on--and on I went, unflinchingly and unswervingly.

Gradually there came a horrid calmness to my mind--the calmness that
follows a shock--a grief too great to last; and there was something
soothing in the conviction that Hautois could not escape me; that so
surely as if I held an enchanted clue or magic wand I could track him
now, if I husbanded my strength, and I could have kissed the
ferocious dog that led me on his devious and secret track.

What had she suffered--my poor Jacqueline!--how much endured ere
death came to her release!

It may seem strange, but I had a grim satisfaction in the knowledge
that her sufferings were all over now--that she was at rest, at
peace, and that she would see how fearfully I would avenge her.

But how, was the startling question or thought which occurred to me;
for in the rapidity of my pursuit through the thickets of briars and
matted shrubs in which I had to make my way, up the rocks which I had
to climb, or down which I had to leap, the pistols had dropped from
my girdle, when or where I knew not, and thus I was--defenceless!

Yet I heeded not even this terrible conviction; my only desire was to
reach, to meet and to grapple with Hautois--weary though I was, to
grapple with him bare-handed, and trust the rest to youth and
strength, to justice and to God.

When twilight was setting in I found myself in a very wild place.
The dog was conducting me up a ravine the sides of which were covered
with vast blocks of basalt, the _débris_ of some earthquake.  In rank
luxuriance the weeds and wild flowers covered them in many places.
On both sides of this wilderness of rocks grew a dense forest, the
timber of which was of several kinds; but the underwood seemed to
consist of wild apple-trees.  Great mountains of rock bordered this
forest on one side; on the other it stretched away into the gloom of
evening and the obscurity of distance.

Although I knew it not, I was then in the forest of St. Aubin du
Cormier, so named from the prevalence of the _cormier_, or sorb-apple
tree--that forest through which flows the subterranean torrent which
forms one of the natural wonders of the province.

On reaching the head of the ravine, the dog led me through a mass of
brushwood, by a path so narrow that it seemed to be such a track as
the feet of wild rabbits might form, and then I found myself before a
large hut, or _chaumière_, of dilapidated aspect.

It was built of stone blocks, and heavily thatched with heather and
straw.  The door, which was opened by a wooden latch of primitive
construction, was old and worm-eaten, but seemed to have been once
strong and well made.  I afterwards found that a bar of oak secured
it transversely on the inside.

Arming myself with a stone, I boldly entered this hut, and found it
deserted.  On the hearth there smouldered a fire of wood, turf, and
fir-cones, showing that it had been recently occupied; and by the
light of this, and the last flush of the set sun which stole through
the little window, I could observe the squalor and wretchedness of
the place.  A few pots of brown ware, a couple of ricketty stools, an
old chest, a hunting-belt that hung on a nail, and a few sheepskins
that lay in a corner, as if to form a bed, were all the furniture of
this cheerless abode.

As I surveyed it, the bloodhound licked my hand with his hot,
steaming tongue, and whined, rubbed himself against me, and scented
about, as if with satisfaction; then he lay down at my feet, lashing
the floor with his thick, heavy tail, as if to inform me that we were
in the lair of Hautois--of this human panther!

But would this man return to it after the deed he had perpetrated?

I could scarcely doubt it; the _chaumière_ was in an utter
wilderness, and while lurking there he must have committed many a
crime ere this.

Would he return alone?--if not, I had perhaps only tracked him hither
to find my own doom sealed; for I was defenceless.

Resolving to possess a weapon if it could be found, I searched the
whole hut, which consisted of only two apartments, but sought in
vain.  Nor stick nor bludgeon were there; so I armed myself with one
of the stools, which was certainly better than nothing.

The window of the inner room, faced the north-west, where a red light
that overspread the sky attracted my attention; for if not some
natural phenomenon, it assuredly proceeded from the flames of a vast
conflagration.

I secured the door by its bar, lest I should be taken by surprise,
and seated myself on a stool in a corner, with the dog crouching at
my feet.  But to rest was impossible, amid the whirl of thought, the
mingled rage and grief that oppressed me.  I felt as one in a burning
fever.

There seemed to be under and about me the ceaseless rush of water.
Was it fancy?  The sound was too real for that; and it seemed to
proceed from a torrent or waterfall at the back of the _chaumière_.
I again entered the inner apartment, through the dirty and broken
lattice of which the moon, shone clearly and brightly upon the
discoloured and ill-jointed boarding of the floor.  No fall of water
was visible without, but the sound of it was louder now than before.

A trap-door about three feet square arrested my attention; and on
raising it by an iron ring in its centre, I felt my flesh creep, when
far down below, in darkness and obscurity, I heard the distant
rushing of a vast torrent of water that flowed unseen down the
mountain side; and I now knew that this trap-door--the concealment of
many a crime--was merely an opening to the subterranean stream of St.
Aubin du Cormier, and that this half-ruined chaumière had been built
immediately over one of the open chasms--without a doubt for purposes
dark and nefarious.

I had scarcely let the trap-door drop from my hand, when the
bloodhound started up with a snort, and uttered a low growl.  Then I
felt a wild fierce glow in my heart, and a prickly sensation pass
over every limb, when, on looking from the window, I beheld him for
whom I longed with a hate so intense and deadly; he whom I had
tracked thus far--he who had on his hands the blood of Jacqueline--he
who had her sufferings and death to atone for--was now plainly
visible as he passed through the screen of wild bushes, and
approached the hut!

The moonlight fell full upon his pale and hideous visage--his black
and matted hair.  He was bareheaded, and had a pair of long pistols
and a knife in his belt, while I was weaponless and weary; but as I
grasped one of the stools I felt, in imagination, the strength of
three men pass into my poor right arm.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE STRUGGLE.

The excitement, the ferocious joy of anticipated vengeance, nearly
suffocated me, as, softly drawing back the bolt of the door, I
retired into a dark corner, from whence I meant to spring upon him.

The latch was lifted, and he entered.  At that moment, as if stirred
by an invisible hand, the embers of the dying fire shot into a flame
that shed a red light over all the squalid apartment, and thus the
wretch detected me in an instant.

"_Sangbleu!_" he exclaimed, and started back, more in wonder than
fear.  "Who are you? hah!" he added, as he recognised me, and drawing
forth a pistol, fired it straight at my head; but happily the ball
struck the hard, thick wood of the stool which I used as a shield,
and remained there.  The force of the shot, however, made me reel;
and as I was rushing forward, he drew forth another, but it flashed
in the pan.  Then, to prevent the use of his knife, I hurled the
stool at his head.  It struck him on the right temple with such force
as to stun him for an instant, and deluged his face with blood.

He was grasping vaguely at his girdle for the haft of the knife which
dandled there, when I closed with him, seizing his right arm; and
then a deadly struggle for life on one hand, and for life and
retribution on the other, ensued between us.

To know that I had in my grasp the hand that had destroyed
Jacqueline, endued me with such savage energy that for a time I was
quite a match for the Herculean ruffian with whom I fought.  I was
lithe, active, and young, and my dragoon drill with sword and club,
had developed every muscle to the utmost.

The aspect of Hautois was frightful!  His face was deathly pale, and
streaked with the blood that poured from the wound on his temple; his
thick black hair was matted and in ell-locks; and his yellow,
bloodshot eyes glared into mine, like those of a wolf, from beneath
their bushy brows, which met as one above his nose.

We never spoke as we swayed to and fro, panting hoarsely, grasping
each other's wrists with a tiger-clutch, and each making futile
efforts to reach the other's throat.  We heard only our deep
breathing, the ceaseless rush of the stream, like a mill-race beneath
the floor, and the growling of the bloodhound, which, by some means,
had shut itself into the inner apartment.

In this struggle, where each man grasped the other with the fierce
compression of a smith's vice, it was evident that whoever got the
victory would yield neither mercy nor quarter to the vanquished.

Suddenly a pang of terror chilled my heart; for I found the muscular
Frenchman becoming stronger than myself, either because he had
husbanded his powers, or that mine (so wearied by past emotion, by
grief, and the toil of the preceding night) had departed; but he bent
me backward till I fell heavily prostrate on the floor, with him
above me, and in an instant both his knees were on my chest.

As yet, his right hand had never reached my throat, for my left was
on his wrist, and I held it from me at arm's length.

Relinquishing the hold his left hand had of me, he sought for the
knife at his girdle, but most fortunately, in our struggle, our
wrestling, writhing, and swaying to and fro, it had dropped from its
sheath, and lay on the floor beyond his reach, some yards off, else
perhaps these adventures had never been committed to paper.

On discovering this, he uttered a horrible malediction, and instantly
plunged his left hand on my throat.  Then a red light seemed to flash
from my eyes; I felt as if the crown of my head was flying off--there
was a hissing and tingling in my ears, and for some moments I endured
all the horror of strangulation, till suddenly changing his mind, he
exclaimed--

"_Sangbleu!_ the trap-door--you shall take a cold bath in the black
Torrent du Cormier, my fine fellow!"  And with a yelling laugh he
proceeded to drag me across the floor of the room while yet
breathless and incapable of resistance.

He dashed open the door of the inner apartment with his foot, and
then with a growl of long-suppressed fury the bloodhound sprang upon
him; rendered fiercer by the blood which still flowed from the wound
in the head of Hautois, it grasped him by the throat, snarling,
worrying and tearing, till dog and man fell down together--the dog
above, the man below.

Trembling with weakness and the overstrained exertion of my recent
struggle, I rose and looked with stern exultation on this new
conflict, at this new and unexpected ally, against whom the human
brute fought apparently in vain, for with all his strength he failed
to wrench or tear the dog's sharp fangs from his already lacerated
throat.

At last, by the terror of approaching death endued with twice his
natural strength, while uttering convulsive sobs of agony, he rose to
his full height, and reeled about the apartment with the great dog
hanging at his throat and the chain rattling at its collar; and what
a face was his, when for a moment a ray of moonlight fell on it
through the broken casement!

Hautois was reeling about close to the trap-door, when an idea seized
me.  I threw it open, and gave him a push with all my strength; and
through the black aperture, with a shriek and a growl the man and dog
vanished together.

I stood alone--alone, with no sound in my ears save the rush of the
subterranean stream--the torrent of St. Aubin du Cormier; how deep,
how far down below, coming from _whence_ and flowing to _where_, no
man knew; but my teeth chattered, and a shudder passed over me.

I let the trap-door drop to shut out the horrid sound, and reeled
giddily into the outer apartment.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE CHAUMIÈRE.

It was not until some minutes had elapsed that I became fully
conscious the fierce struggle was over, and that Jacqueline was
avenged; but there lay on the floor the pistols, the knife, and the
blood of him whose body was now whirling along the chasms and amid
the eddies of that subterranean stream whose source and outlet are
alike unknown.

Tossing a stool upon the fire to feed the sinking flame, and heedless
of the danger of being found in what was doubtless the haunt, the
abode of an outlaw and robber, perhaps the rendezvous of his partners
in crime, I sank upon the floor, to reflect and to rest.  It was only
then that I felt how weak, how weary I was in body, how sick and ill
at heart.

I was trembling from head to foot, and bathed in a cold perspiration;
so much had I undergone within the last four-and-twenty hours that a
kind of stupor came upon me.

And Jacqueline--my soul was full of her!  Her voice seemed ever in my
ear--her name upon my tongue--her image before me.  The contour of
her head, with every soft feature and familiar expression of eye;
glances that were filled with affection and susceptibility; her
smiling lip.  Ah, the pale mask which lay at the foot of yonder tree
in the forest--could it be the face of her I loved so well?

If I am to live, thought I, oh for the whirl and excitement of war--a
storm, siege, wreck, battle, anything that will lure me from myself
and from thoughts that are maddening.  To have loved her and have
lost her thus!  Every pulsation was a pang, for I endured all the
keen misery of knowing that I had been loved tenderly, truly, and
deeply in return, and yet had lost her.

The images I drew of her endurance and death, they indeed were too
much to think of long, so happily crushed by my own reflections,
overcome by toil, and lulled by the ceaseless murmur of the
subterranean stream that poured beneath the chaumière I fell asleep
at last on the hard floor where I lay.

I must have lain thus for some hours when voices roused me, and I
started up to find that day had broken and several men were about me.

I had a "splitting headache" (as Charters used to say), a burning
thirst, and bloodshot eyes, the result of all I had undergone; but on
staggering up, I recognised the Chevalier de Boisguiller, Urbain the
gardener, and Bertrand, with several others, who followed the track I
had pursued, and who thus succeeded in discovering the wretched
chaumière which had formed the lair of Hautois, whom they clamorously
inquired if I had seen.

"Yes," said I; "and moreover I have seen the last of him."

"How--what has happened?" they asked together, while the chevalier
added--

"These pistols and this knife lying here--the blood on the floor, and
the broken stool, bear evidence of a conflict.  What has taken place?"

I briefly related all, and Boisguiller on lifting the trap-door,
gazed with a shrinking aspect on the black torrent that rushed far
down below; and it would appear that for dark purposes the
_chaumière_ certainly had been built immediately over one of the few
open chasms in the rocks, through which this torrent of water
traverses the forest of St. Aubin du Cormier.

"Your vengeance has indeed been ample--only perhaps too sudden," said
he, after a pause; "and now let us return, but first, Urbain, we
shall set fire to this den, lest it find an occupant similar to the
last.  Then, monsieur, what are we to do with you?"

"It matters little," said I, wearily, and sick at heart.

"You are probably unaware that the British have landed again, and set
fire to Cherbourg?"

"Indeed, chevalier!" I exclaimed, interested in spite of myself, and
remembering that the blaze I had seen in the sky to the north-west
was now accounted for.

"Yes; a strong force, we know not how many, have disembarked at Bay
des Maries."

"Under the Duke of Marlborough?"

"No; the commander is a general named Bligh."

"_Pardi! cet officier est un homme d'expédition!_" muttered the old
grenadier, Bertrand; "he has already fired all the coast."

"Yes, and he is a man of courage and daring, too," added the
chevalier.  "_Peste!_ he shall not stay long in France, for all that.
But we have no time to lose; our sorrowful chase has come to an end,
and I must rejoin my troop, as all our forces are closing towards
Cherbourg to succour the Comte de Raymond.  I repeat but the words of
my friend Madame de Bourgneuf, when I say, monsieur, that I wish you
every success in life, now when bidding you, it may be, farewell for
ever.  But horses are here, and Bertrand the porter, who has been an
old soldier, shall accompany you within sight of your outposts at
Cherbourg; so let us at once be gone."

Perceiving that I was so faint that I could scarcely reply, the
chevalier kindly said that if I wished to rejoin my countrymen it was
necessary to repair my strength, so he insisted upon me imbibing the
contents of his flask, which were pure cognac, and Urbain gave me
from his pouch a _galette_ or pancake, made of buckwheat and butter.

We separated soon after, and on looking back from the road that led
to Avranches, old Bertrand and I saw a column of smoke ascending into
the clear blue sky from the forest of St. Aubin du Cormier.  It was
from the burning hut wherein I had passed a night so terrible.

Riding at a quick pace we travelled together the whole day,
frequently passing for miles through dense forests and
apple-orchards; but after leaving Coutances behind, old Bertrand
began to gnaw his wiry moustache, to make grimaces and mutter "_Sacré
Dieu!_" "_Morbleu!_" and so forth; for now the roads became covered
by people hastening inland with their children and valuables, and by
waggons laden with furniture, sick and aged; the panic being great in
that corner of Normandy; where the strength, object, and ultimate end
of the new British expedition were quite unknown.

At last, after the sun had set, and the moon arisen in splendour, we
saw from the heights, about seven miles off, the town and
fortifications of Cherbourg, with the stately fleet of Commodore Howe
riding quietly at anchor in the bay, which shone like a vast but
rippling sheet of silver, from Fort Querqueville on the west, to the
Isle Pelee on the east.

The way was clear before me now.  I bade a kind farewell to Bertrand,
dismounted, and handing to him the bridle of the chevalier's horse,
walked hastily in one direction, while he rode off in the other.
Scarcely had we separated, when a mounted patrol of ten dragoons in
scarlet cloaks, riding slowly, each with carbine on thigh, came past.

"Who goes there?" challenged the leader, in English.

"A friend!" I replied, mechanically.

"English, by Jove!" exclaimed the officer in command, as the whole
patrol simultaneously checked their horses to listen; "who or what
are you, my man?"

"One of the Light Troop of the Scots Greys, left wounded in the rear,
after the army abandoned Paramé," said I, stepping forward and
saluting.

"Zounds! and you have been in France all this time?"

"Yes, sir, since the beginning of June."

"All right," replied the officer, shortening his reins; "remain with
us.  We are a party of the 11th Light Dragoons, and shall pass you on
to headquarters."




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE LIGHT TROOP.

I was welcomed back by the gallant Captain Lindsay, by Lieutenant
Douglas, and Cornet Keith (the three officers of the light troop), by
old Sergeant Duff, big Hob Elliot, and other comrades, with a warmth
that was very flattering; but by none more than by Jack Charters and
honest Tom Kirkton, and among them all, on the night of my return,
rejoining, or "resuscitation" as they phrased it, there was held
quite an ovation.

For two months my name had remained on the muster-roll as "missing;"
but no doubt existed that I had been sabred or shot in our affair
with the French hussars near Dol.

We had a jovial meeting, and the pantries of the good wives of the
adjacent village supplied us amply with the means of having a
plentiful supper.  With ham, bread, fowls, wine, and cognac we
regaled ourselves while lounging on the grass, with the silver moon
wading through snowy clouds for a lamp and the star-studded sky for a
canopy.

In some instances, however, the indiscriminate pillage of government
stores and abandoned dwelling-houses caused several scenes of riot,
disorder, and debauchery, which neither patrols, the picket, or guard
of the Provost Marshal could repress.

I was now in the best place to teach me to forget the past.  The
merry and familiar voices, the gay uniforms, the noble grey chargers
picketed at their breast ropes close by our bivouac, and the _tout
ensemble_ of the latter, weaned me from thoughts that were
oppressive, and the ardour of the service glowed anew within me.

A narrative of my adventures in Brittany was necessary, but I took
care to relate only such portions as I cared to let those heedless
fellows know; and when I concluded, my green hunting suit, with its
Parisian cut and fashion, afforded a subject for much merriment, and
for many empty jokes of that small kind which will go a long way in
the barrack and guardroom.

I found Charters and Kirkton rather more soured and reckless than
when I last saw them.  Both had expected promotion to follow our
first expedition to France, and both still enjoyed their respective
ranks of full corporal and full private; thus when we betook us to
rectifying the acidity of the Norman wine by pure cognac they began
to moralize in their old fashion.

"The devil!" said Charters; "ten years have I worn a red coat, and I
am tiring now even of it.  But every day that passes into night is
one march further forward to the land of the leal where we shall all
meet at last; so pass the bottle and let us be jolly while we may.
How, Gauntlet, you shake your head?  What the deuce has come over the
boy!  France does not seem to have improved him a bit."

"Nay, Charters," said I, "but remember that the troop parades an hour
before daybreak to-morrow, so no more brandy.  Have we not had
enough?"

"One bottle more, say I!"

"Zounds, Jack!" urged Kirkton, "if you were not a very sponge you
would have been drowned in wine long ago."

"Come, Tom," said Charters, who was rather tipsy, "don't be
mutinous--I have an idea----"

"What! after all this wine and brandy you have actually an idea?  It
must be worth uncounted gold."

"It may be worth the king's commission, Tom, or such a coffin as the
pioneer's shovel gives us," replied Charters, little knowing how
prophetically he spoke.  "We are to attack St. Vallon to-morrow, and
if the French have a standard in the field, I will take it sword in
hand--I, John Charters of Amisfield--or die in the attempt!"

And tipsy though he was, this unfortunate fellow made the boast with
a lofty dignity that repressed the smile which spread on Kirkton's
face.  And now drums beating and trumpets sounding in varying cadence
the tattoo, announced that sleep, or at least silence, should reign
in camp and bivouac, till the commodore's ship in the bay should fire
the morning gun upon the eventful morrow.




CHAPTER XIX.

CHARTERS' VOW.

Sick, ill, without a horse or accoutrements, I was now little better
than a non-effective, and thus happily, was only a spectator of the
destruction of Cherbourg.  I say happily, for France was the land of
Jacqueline, and I had not heart for the work of pillage and
destruction that ensued around me.

Lieutenant-General Bligh, an old and experienced officer, having
succeeded to the command of the troops, the squadron had sailed from
St. Helen's as before, under the pennant of Commodore Howe, who had
on board the _Essex_ his Royal Highness Prince Edward (afterwards
Duke of York and Albany) who was serving as a midshipman to learn the
rudiments of the sea-service for which he was destined, and in which
he died at an early age, with the rank of Rear Admiral.

On the 7th August, the squadron, consisting of five line-of-battle
ships, nine frigates, and ninety-eight transports, with other craft,
came to anchor in the bay of Cherbourg, which is one of the five
great _ports militaires_ of France, as the general had special orders
to destroy the whole place.

By this time a body of French troops of the line, in bright blue
uniforms, with some companies of the Irish Brigade clad in scarlet,
had intrenched themselves in a line which extended for four miles
along the coast, from Fort Ecœurdeville to two miles beyond
Cherbourg, and these hasty defences they strengthened by redoubts
mounted with cannon, most of which were twenty-four pounders.

In rear of this line were some corps of cavalry.

While Commodore Howe sent a bomb-ketch to anchor close off the town,
with orders to pitch a few shells into it from time to time, and thus
amuse or decoy the officer in command there, the British forces
landed three miles westward of Querqueville, the most western fort of
the bay.  During the disembarkation several other bomb-ketches
shelled the line of intrenchments not only with explosives of the
usual kind, but from mortars loaded with musket balls, thus making
great slaughter with little or no risk to us.

As on the former occasion the flat-bottomed boats were hoisted out,
and the three regiments of guards, with the grenadier company of
every battalion on board the fleet, were first rowed ashore, and
formed in line upon a portion of the beach that was flat and open.
Each boat contained eighteen seamen and fifty grenadiers, and had a
red flag displayed at its stern.

Beyond the landing place opened a grassy hollow, with a pretty
village that crowned a steep eminence on the right flank; on the left
were thick green hedges enclosing orchards laden with fruit of the
most brilliant yellow and crimson colours, and amid these were seen
the serried files and glittering bayonets of the enemy.

This was a beautiful evening, when the summer sun of Normandy covered
all the fertile land and rippling sea with warm light, and bathed in
purple tints the undulating ridges of the Mont-du-Roule and of the
Boc-au-chat, while the waves that washed the sloping bastions of
Cherbourg, of Fort Royal, and those on the Isle Pelee, or those that
broke in foam on the rocks of St. Anne, seemed billows of liquid gold.

Puff--puff--puff--came the white smoke out from the green hedgerows
and glowing orchards, as the foe opened a running fire of musketry,
under which our grenadiers and Guards formed line, and rushing
forward with fixed bayonets and a hearty hurrah, drove in the French
out-pickets and stormed a breast-work that lay across the hollow way
beyond the beach.

So rapid was the advance, that in this encounter there were only
three privates killed and seventeen wounded; while _three hundred_ of
the enemy were killed or wounded, and among the former was a Captain
Macartney of the Irish Brigade, in whose pocket Hob Elliot of ours,
"found a letter," as the newspapers stated, "from a lady in London,
dated on the 30th ultimo, assuring him that we were about to pay
France a visit, and giving a particular account of our strength."

General Bligh took possession of the village of Erville, where
several Irish deserters came in to him with assurances that a great
force was coming against the British; but he declared that "if twenty
thousand came he would not retire until Cherbourg was in ruins!"
Having thus succeeded in turning the western flank of this famous
port, he encamped under canvas his whole force, which consisted only
of three battalions of the Guards, the 5th, 30th, 33rd, 34th, 56th,
67th and 68th regiments of Foot with those of Richmond and
Cornwallis; the Light Troop of the Greys and of five other corps,
making, with the artillery, in all about ten thousand men.

The night at Erville was lovely, the air serene and soft.  Groves of
the wild mulberry bordered the camp, and others of orange and apple
trees loaded the night wind with perfume.  The stars shone clear in
heaven, and the sky was blue and bright from its zenith to the far
horizon; but amid that calm scene there lay many a stiffened corpse
and gaping wound in the hollow way through which the foe had been
routed.

Lord Clare's Irish regiment, 700 strong, occupied Cherbourg, and the
Count de Raymond, a Maréchal de Camp, who commanded in chief, had
also under his orders Count Horions' new Regiment de Liege, with the
old battalions of Lorraine, Languedoc and Guienne; in all, with
militia, a force of about fourteen thousand men, was close at hand,
so a bloody resistance was anticipated by our troops upon the morrow.

The morrow came, and before daybreak the whole army was under arms,
and advancing, with the light dragoons in front, towards Cherbourg,
with drums beating and colours flying.

Some daring French artillerymen, who had been left in the solitary
fort of Querqueville, now opened a dangerous fire from a few pieces
of cannon as our troops advanced.  This seemed to serve as a signal
to their comrades, who immediately abandoned Cherbourg _en masse_,
and without exchanging a shot retired to a place named St. Vallon,
nine miles distant.

The guns in Querqueville were still firing briskly, when a boat from
the Commodore's ship was seen pulling inshore to the westward of the
battery.

A dragoon being required to bear an order to the officer in charge of
this boat, a volunteer was requested for the duty, which was one of
great risk, as the grape from Querqueville was sweeping all the open
plateau to be traversed by the messenger.

On this, Charters immediately rode forward, "recovered" his sword and
presented himself.

"Why have _you_ volunteered for this?" asked Captain Lindsay, in a
tone of reproof.

"Why, sir?" repeated Charters, almost haughtily.

"Yes."

"Because, as the player says--

                  'I am a man
  So weary with disaster, tugged by fortune,
  That I would set my life on any chance,
  To mend it or be rid on't'

Captain Lindsay, life is no longer a prism to me."

"Ride fast!" said the captain, briefly.

Charters shortened his reins, gave his grey the spurs, and departed
at once.  As he proceeded towards Querqueville Point, the French
cannoniers redoubled their efforts to bring him down.  He frequently
waved his sword as if in defiance, and escaped as if by a miracle.
Then on his descending to the beach, where some rocks protected him,
the battery turned its round shot and grape on the advancing boat.

Suddenly there rose from the sea and pierced the sky, the mingled
yell of many voices.  A twenty-four pound shot had dashed the boat to
pieces, and twelve seamen and a little midshipman were seen
struggling and sinking amid the debris of oars, thwarts and planks,
while the French sent dose after dose of grape to kill the drowning
men.

The middy struggled bravely; being light, the waves bore him towards
the rocks, but Charters saw that unless succoured, the poor lad would
certainly perish amid the surf that boiled over the ridge.

He sheathed his sword, shook his gloved hand fiercely at the battery,
and urging his horse into the sea, even while the hissing grape sowed
it thick with tiny waterspouts around him, succeeded in grasping the
sinking lad by the collar, and turning the head of his gallant grey
toward the shore, he bravely battled with the surf, the long waves of
which, reddened by the sunshine, seemed to boil in fiery foam upon
the beach, and rolled over his shoulders, so that at times the
nostrils of his charger were only visible, yet he succeeded in
landing the half-drowned midshipman, and rode twice afterwards into
the sea to succour the seamen, but succeeded in saving only one.

This was done in the presence of the whole left wing of the army,
which gave him three tremendous cheers, and a few minutes afterwards
the grenadiers of Richmond's corps with the light troop of the Greys
made a dash at the fort, which immediately surrendered.

As the troops advanced into Cherbourg the French flag was pulled
down, and the Union Jack hoisted on the ramparts by the people in
token of capitulation, and ere long, the magistrates in their robes
and insignia of office came forth from the gates towards the land
side to meet General Bligh, who promised that save government stores
which he had special orders to destroy, all property should be
respected.  Thus, by three in the afternoon our troops had peaceable
possession of the town and forts of boasted Cherbourg.

In the evening, the Greys, a troop of the 11th and a body of
grenadiers were pushed on towards St. Vallon, from whence a party of
French Horse, the hussars of Boisguiller, with the heavy dragoons of
Languedoc _checquered_, had advanced to reconnoitre or to skirmish.

As our light dragoons moved off, the aide-de-camp of the
commander-in-chief rode up to the troop of ours and addressing
Charters, said--

"You did three acts of great bravery to-day under the fire of Fort
Querqueville, but chiefly in saving the life of that midshipman."

"Sir," replied Jack, nonchalantly, "I only did the duty dictated by
common humanity; and I hope the little mid has dried his jacket by
this time."

"Do you know the name of him you saved?"

"Not I--never thought of such a thing."

"Well--that little middy was his Royal Highness Prince Edward, the
second son of the king; and I have it in command from
Lieutenant-General Bligh to compliment you, Corporal Charters, and to
say that you shall have the _first_ pair of colours that become
vacant in the force now under his orders."

The nut-brown cheek of Charters flushed, as he replied in voice
rendered husky by emotion--

"It is well, sir, and I thank the general.  I have saved the lives of
men ere now; but they were merely private soldiers, _not_ royal
highnesses, so my humanity or bravery went for little."

"Charters, this bitterness and pride are your ruin," said the
aide-de-camp, who knew well the story of our comrade.

"Not so; tell General Bligh that I am not ungrateful, and that I
shall thank him from my soul, if, before I die, he replace upon my
shoulders those epaulettes of which they should never have been
deprived!"

"He will, Charters, and I shall be one of the first to welcome you
and to wet the new commission," replied the frank staff officer.
"Captain Lindsay, you had better form the two troops in squadron, and
make a dash at those advancing cavalry, as the ground is open here."

Indeed, while this conversation had been proceeding, the French
hussars and heavy dragoons, about one hundred and eighty in all, had
debouched from some hedgerows upon a piece of open moorland, with a
swallow-tailed banner of light blue silk flying in their centre.

Charters pointed to it with his sword, and said to Kirkton--

"You see yonder standard, Tom?  Well--I shall fulfil my vow of last
night, or my horse shall go home with an empty saddle!"

Quietly and orderly as if upon parade in Hyde Park, the two troops
formed squadron; Captain Lindsay equalized them, appointed the troop
leaders and the serrefiles; he then took post half a horse's length
in front of the standard, which was borne by troop sergeant-major
Duff, and which was of scarlet silk embroidered with the thistle and
St. Andrew, the regimental motto, and the national one, _Nemo me
impune lacessit_.

I shall not attempt to describe the fury of the encounter that took
place, as I was not present.  It was long, desperate, and hand to
hand.  Charters unhorsed the cornet and captured the standard which
belonged to the Languedoc dragoons, who made a desperate rally to
recover it, and cut him off.  For some minutes he and big Hob Elliot
were fairly surrounded by the enemy, but Captain Lindsay made a
gallant charge to save him, as he was a prime favourite with the
corps.  In that charge the captain perished, but the French were
repulsed.*


* "Several skirmishes were fought by the out-parties of each army, in
one of which, Captain Lindsay, a gallant officer (of the Greys), who
had been very instrumental in training the Light Horse, perished."
Smollet, _Hist. of Eng._, vol. vi.


The squadron was brought out of the field by Lieutenant Douglas of
ours, and it was with a sad heart I saw them enter Cherbourg, bearing
across their saddles the wounded and the dead.

Among the latter was my poor friend Charters, slain by three
pistol-shots and eight sabre wounds, yet still grasping with a deadly
clutch the standard of the dragoons of Languedoc.

Hob Elliot carried his body out of the field.




CHAPTER XX.

THE SACK OF CHERBOURG.

During the reign of Louis XIV. plans had been proposed by the
celebrated Marshal Vauban, for the fortification of Cherbourg; these
were then only partially carried into effect, but a noble and
spacious harbour had subsequently been formed.  Two piers, one a
thousand, the other five hundred, feet in length, had been built, and
outer and inner basins were made large enough to contain ships of the
line; these basins were closed by gates each forty-two feet wide.

To destroy these, General Bligh had fifteen hundred soldiers at work
making blasts, and so well did they prosecute the art of destruction,
that the labour of thirty years, and the expense of one million two
hundred thousand pounds (English) perished in a few days.  In short,
the noble harbour of Cherbourg was utterly ruined, and the shipping
it contained was given to the flames.

We took twenty-four tons of gunpowder out of the French magazines,
and blew up or threw down all the bastions and batteries along the
shore, from Fort Querqueville to the Isle Pelee, and dismounted, or
flung into the sea, one hundred and sixty-three pieces of cannon and
three mortars, with a vast quantity of shot and shell.  Two mortars
and twenty-two beautiful guns, all of polished brass, together with
several colours (among them, of course, the standard taken by poor
Jack Charters), were put on board the commodore's ship.

On the side of one of the great sluice-gates I saw an inscription in
French to the following effect:--

  "Louis and Fleury trust to Asfield's care,
  Amid the waves to raise this mighty pier,
  Propitious to our prayers the fabric stood,
  Curbed the fierce tide, and tamed the threatening flood,
  Hence wealth and safety flow--hence just renown,
  The king, the statesman, and the hero crown!

    This work, by command of Louis XV.
  The advice of Cardinal Fleury, and direction of Count Asfield,
            Shall endure for ever!"


Scarcely had I finished reading this, than an officer of our regiment
called to me--

"Hallo! look out! stand back there!"

He had a match in his hand, which he applied to a train, and in one
minute the whole fabric, with a tremendous concussion, rent, split,
rose into the air amid a cloud of smoke, and vanished as it sank into
the surf that boiled over it.

Two armed ships which lay in the inner basin we despatched to
England, and eighteen others we burned or sunk filled with stones.
On the people of Cherbourg a contribution of forty-four thousand
livres was levied by beat of drum; and so rapidly did our miners and
devastators do their work, that the whole place was a scene of
melancholy ruin and desolation before the Count de Raymond could
muster forces of the line sufficient to dislodge us, for France had
then two armies in Germany.

Thus, all our troops were on board, and the whole armament ready for
sea by the 17th of August; our total loss, after having destroyed,
what was styled in the prints of the day, "that most galling thorn in
the side of British commerce," being only Captain Lindsay of the
Scots Greys, and twenty-four others killed, some thirty wounded, and
ten horses.

The whole army re-embarked without molestation at Fort Galette, about
three o'clock in the morning.

The commodore, who had now, by the death of his brother, who fell at
the head of the 55th Regiment in the disastrous affair of
Ticonderoga, succeeded to the title of Viscount Howe, gave the signal
for sea, and we sailed on the evening of the 17th for England.  I was
again on board his ship with the light troop of my regiment.

The destruction I had witnessed, and the distress and alarm of the
poor unoffending people, sickened me of war for a time, and I felt
happy when we bore up the Channel, though still haunted by memories
of the land of Brittany, on which I should never look again--a land
of stern and dreary mountains, of dark primæval forests, of rocky
bluffs, of ruined castles and giant monoliths--the land where I loved
so tenderly and endured so terribly.

On the 19th I saw Old England again, and the whole fleet came to
anchor in Portland Roads.

The colours and brass guns taken at Cherbourg, after being exhibited
to gaping multitudes in Hyde Park, were drawn in triumph through all
the principal streets of London, as the spoil of conquered France,
amid a noisy pomp that brought ridicule on the ministry.  After this
they were lodged in the Tower.

Instead of being sent home to Scotland, as we had fondly speculated,
the light troop of the Scots Greys now marched through Dorsetshire
and Hampshire into Sussex, where we reached the head-quarters of the
regiment, then under orders to join the army in Germany.

Our fine old colonel--"auld Geordie Buffcoat," as the corps named
him--complimented the troop for its uniform good conduct during the
two expeditions to the coast of France, and hoped that when on the
Rhine we should still prove ourselves "to be his own brave lads, who
were _second to none_!"




CHAPTER XXI.

WHAT THE GAZETTE CONTAINED.

I had now served one campaign, though a short one; had seen the
conclusion of another, ending in the total destruction of Cherbourg,
and was on the eve of commencing a third, and yet found myself,
despite all my day-dreams and lofty aspirations, unnoticed and
unknown.  I was graver now than before.  It seemed to me that I had
seen much of the world, and assuredly I had suffered much in the time
that had elapsed between our landing at Cancalle Bay and the
re-embarkation at Fort Galette.

We were now at Wadhurst, a secluded place in Sussex.  On the morning
after we joined, Colonel Preston sent for me to the orderly-room,
where there ensued a conversation which caused some speculation in
the regiment, where my incognito was still preserved.  The secret of
who I was, or what I should have been, was now known to Kirkton only,
for poor Jack Charters, as I have already said, was in his soldier's
grave among the ruins of Cherbourg, and the only relic I possessed of
him was a pair of sleeve-links.

The bluff old colonel was standing with his spurred heels planted
firmly on the hearthrug, and his hands behind his back, which was
opposed to the fireplace, in the true orderly-room fashion, and he
gave me a friendly nod as I entered.

"You are aware, of course, Gauntlet," said he, "that money to
purchase a cornetcy has been lodged for you."

"With whom, sir?" I asked, in astonishment.

"The regimental agents, Messrs. Cox and Mair, of Craig's Court,
London."

"By whom, colonel?"

"Your friends--you should know best."

"I have no friends--never had any," said I, bitterly.

"It was lodged two months since," resumed the colonel, "and gazetted
you would have been ere this, but for our doubt about your fate, poor
Captain Lindsay having sent your name to the War Office as _missing_."

I stood looking at the grave, kind, and soldierly old man with a
stupified air.

My cousin Aurora must have done this--I was certain of it--for no one
else in all the world knew of me, or cared for me; but I was too
proud to accept of this donation even from her--from the usurper of
my patrimony, for such I deemed her--and urged the colonel to write
at once to the regimental agents, desiring them to return the money
to the depositor thereof, whoever he or she might he.

I said this so haughtily, so bitterly, and peremptorily, and with
such a flush on my cheek, that the adjutant and orderly-room clerks,
who were fussing among docquets of papers and returns, looked up with
surprise, and the old colonel, after carefully wiping a great pair of
spectacles, put them on his copper-coloured nose, and surveyed me
from head to foot with extreme coolness and curiosity.

"Zounds!  Gauntlet," said he, "you are a very extraordinary
fellow--very!  Have you no wish to rise in the service?"

"By my own merit, sir, I have every wish, but not by the money--(of
others, I was about to say, but added)--the money that should have
been mine."

"Should--hum."

"I shall go to Germany with you, Colonel Preston, as a private
trooper, and I care little if I never come back again."

"And you positively refuse this commission?"

"From an unknown donor, yes, colonel."

"Well, 'tis puzzling, but you know your own affairs best.  I have the
reputation of being the most eccentric old fellow in the service;
henceforth you shall enjoy the reputation of being the most eccentric
young one."

Old Preston gave me a kind of nod, as if to intimate that the
interview was over, and resumed a conference with the
farrier-sergeant concerning the re-shoeing of all the horses prior to
embarkation, while I strolled forth into the barrack-yard to ponder
over what had passed.

The news of this interview rapidly spread, and I was speedily joined
by Tom Kirkton.

"By Jove!" he exclaimed, "I like your spirit, Gauntlet; yet this
seems to me--and it would have seemed to poor Jack, had he been
here--the very acme of petulance and folly."

Selfishness and ambition struggled with pride.  I was silent, for it
seemed to me that never again might such a chance of being raised to
my proper position occur to me, and already I half repented having
scorned or refused the proffered gift, without inquiry.  It was not
too late to retract!  I made one pace towards the orderly-room, but
pride resumed its power, and I turned away.

"It must be the act of my cousin, Aurora Gauntlet," said I, "for I
have not a relative on earth that I know of, Tom, but her."

"Does it not occur to you, most sapient sir, that your cousin might
find it easier and more convenient to forget you--to ignore rather
than to remember you, and do her utmost to be your friend?"

"True, Tom, but you cannot feel as I feel in this matter."

"And then, of course, it is not every dragoon who carries in his
valise a diploma of baronetcy."

"These last words of yours, Kirkton, have cured me even of regret,"
said I, bitterly.

"Then I am sorry that they passed my lips.  'Oons man, why not make
love to her?--there are worse matches in this world than a young and
handsome cousin."

These words provoked only an angry smile, and the trumpet sounding
for stable duty cut short the interview by hurrying us to look after
the wants of our respective steeds.

So, according to my desire, Colonel Preston wrote to the agents, and
the money was returned; but in the next War Office Gazette how great
was the surprise of my comrades and myself when we read the following
announcement--

"_Scots Greys, Light Troop_.--Lieut. Sholto Douglas to be captain,
_vice_ Lindsay, killed in action; Cornet James Keith to be Lieut.,
_vice_ Douglas, promoted; Sir Basil Gauntlet, Bart., to be cornet,
_vice_ Keith."

"Sir Basil Gauntlet, _Baronet_!"

Had a loaded bomb of the greatest size exploded in the centre of the
mess-room table it could scarcely have created so much speculation as
this remarkable gazette did among the officers of his Majesty's
Second Dragoons, of whom I thus found myself one.

Could I doubt that Aurora had done this?  Could I be less than
grateful that she--the only being who inherited the same name and
blood, was determined not to forget me?  Thus, finding that in my
stubborn pride I declined the cornetcy by purchase, without further
consultation she had resolved to drag me into my place by a
commission without it.

As yet I knew not all this with certainty, and was too proud to write
to Netherwood Hall; moreover, I knew not whether Aurora was there,
though had I considered, the celerity with which the whole affair had
been transacted should have convinced me that she was in the
metropolis.

And thus I was an officer, an officer at last, and without having
performed even the smallest of those superhuman acts of heroism of
which I had drawn such dashing pictures in my day-dreams; without
capturing standards sword-in-hand, without leading on furious
charges, or disastrous forlorn hopes; made an officer simply through
a note, written by a pretty girl's hand to some official source.

Thus was I promoted; my comrades congratulated me, and I felt a
joyous certainty that their emotions were sincere, even those of the
old grumblers and the "knowing ones," who at the outset of his career
had fleeced poor Basil the recruit of his bounty at the Canteen and
tavern.

The day of embarkation for Germany had not been named, but it was
known to be drawing near: thus, with the extremely limited means at
my disposal I had little else to think of than providing myself with
a horse in addition to my trooper uniform and other _et cetera_
befitting my rank.  Those friendly and fatherly gentlemen of the race
of Judah who hang about all barracks as the carrion crow and vulture
in mid-air overhang a battle-field, were at hand to aid me for a
"moderate consideration" in the way of thirty or forty per cent.
interest, and the whole affair was soon done--all the sooner that old
Colonel Preston was my friend.

In a _week_ after my appointment (the rules of the service were not
then what they were afterwards) I found myself on duty as an officer,
and oddly enough it was that of a _marine_ on board a frigate.




CHAPTER XXII.

THE PRISON SHIP.

A thirty-six gun frigate, the _Alceste_, crowded with French
prisoners, had for some reason, I know not what, come into the old
harbour of Rye, which was then becoming rapidly choked up with sand,
and unfortunately she became, as the sailors term it, _neaped_, which
means being left so far aground by the neap-tide, which there rises
to the height of seventeen feet, that there was no chance of her
floating even at high-water, until the spring-tide flowed again.

In this state she lay imbedded in the sand, and careened over to
port, much to the discomfort of those on board.

Several brawls having ensued among the prisoners, as the marine guard
had been withdrawn (to partake in a third, and, as it proved in the
sequel, most disastrous expedition to the coast of France), the
officer in command applied for a guard of dismounted dragoons, the
Greys being the nearest troops at hand; and thus with twenty men of
the light troop I found myself doing marine duty on board H.M. ship
_Alceste_.

In her commander I recognised one of the junior officers of Lord
Howe's ship, a young lieutenant, for the frigate had all her guns out
save two, and was simply degraded to the rank of a floating prison.
He welcomed me all the more warmly that he was a countryman of mine,
and one who spoke his native dialect in all its Doric breadth and
native purity.  He was afterwards that Captain I---- who commanded
the _Belliqueux_, 64, at Camperdown, and who in the beginning of the
action, on failing to make out Lord Duncan's signals amid the smoke,
after various attempts flung the signal book on deck, and shouted
from the poop--

"Up wi' yer helm, damme, and gang doon into the middle o't!"  Then
running in between two of the enemy's ships he shortened sail, and
engaged his guns on both sides at once.

Now lest the reader may never have seen a hulk crowded with French
prisoners, I shall sketch briefly a little of what we saw on board of
the _Alceste_.

A few seamen and petty officers composed her crew, and she had on
board, and under their care, four hundred desperadoes, as she was the
condemned ship of the larger hulks which lay moored in Portsmouth
harbour and elsewhere, being the receptacle for those prisoners whose
misconduct, desperate character, or violent disposition rendered them
obnoxious to rule and to the rest of their comrades.

Each of these prisoners when brought on board was provided with a
suit of yellow uniform, this colour being deemed sufficiently
remarkable to ensure notice and recapture in case of escape being
effected.  Each had also a hammock and bedding.  To cook their
rations certain men were elected by themselves, and the sole duty
imposed upon the general body was the simple task of keeping
themselves clean, the space they occupied between decks neat and
tidy, and of bringing up their hammocks daily to air in the nettings.

Soldiers or seamen with loaded muskets were posted at various parts
of the vessel, and in the poop cabins were two twenty-four pounders
kept loaded; and these, in case of revolt or disturbance could be run
through ports in the bulkhead, to sweep the decks with grape and
canister shot.

On the main deck was a railed space named the _pound_, wherein the
prisoners were allowed to walk and amuse themselves during the day;
and there they were at liberty to expose for sale those boxes of
dominoes, toy ships, buttons, bodkins, and other trifles, which, with
the native ingenuity of their country, French prisoners were wont to
manufacture from their ration bones and pieces of wood given to them
by the ship carpenter.

But from the character of our prisoners--the refuse of the other
prison hulks--I found few such traces of industry on board the
_Alceste_.

In consequence of the absence of the marines, the discomfort of the
ship while lying careened to port, and her vicinity to the land,
Lieutenant I---- soon found the prisoners in a furious state of
discontent, and beginning to encourage hopes of breaking loose by
cutting a hole in the ship's side with a knife.

The ringleaders he had punished according to his printed regulations;
but ten days in the black hole, among rats and bilge-water, extra
deck-cleaning duty, and short allowance of hard biscuits and stale
"swipes," utterly failed to repress their turbulence and
insubordination.

There were sailors, soldiers, privateersmen, merchant-seamen,
civilians, and even officers who had broken their parole, crammed
together in wretchedness and filth, some of them being almost in a
state of nudity, with nothing more than a piece of old sail tied
round them, notwithstanding all the excellent regulations of the
Transport Board, and the exertions of the officers and slender crew
of the _Alceste_, for most of these Frenchmen were now so desperate
and degraded that they cared less for death than life.  Thus, never
shall I forget the impression made upon me when I looked along the
far vista of the lower deck, when the flakes of yellow sunlight were
streaming across it through the barred gratings of the triced-up
ports, and saw the tattered figures, the scrubby beards, the scarred
forms--scarred less in battle than by prison brawls (for some who
were obnoxious to the rest were horribly mutilated)--the shock heads
of black, uncombed hair, the unwashed visages and bloodshot eyes of
those prisoners--the dull apathy of some, the ferocious hate
exhibited by others; and when I heard the yells, screams, obscenity
and mockery with which they greeted us as new comers, and chiefly
when my guard, as a hint, deliberately loaded their carbines with
ball-cartridge before them.

"From what do all these miseries and disorders arise?" I asked, as we
retired and entered the great cabin, the windows of which faced to
the coast of Kent.

"You may well inquire," replied Lieutenant I----; "they have their
origin in an inordinate passion for gambling."

"Gambling?"

"Yes; you would be astonished," continued the lieutenant, whose
dialect I render in English, "if you knew how these incorrigible
wretches persevere in a vice that ends in the death of many and the
misery of all.  Their clothes, their beds, their rations, the hair of
their heads, and their very teeth, they convert into objects on which
to hazard the turn of a card or a cast of the dice.  For months in
advance many of them have lost all their food to more fortunate or
more knavish gamblers; and so hard of heart have some of these
become, that they will see their victims perish of hunger before
their eyes without bestowing a morsel to alleviate their sufferings.
Many have died on the lower deck, naked, of cold in the winter, and
others of sheer starvation.  In the stomachs of two, who were thus
found dead in the cable-tier yesterday, our surgeon found only a
little water.  I have had small-arm men posted over the mess-tables
with loaded pistols, to force each man to eat his own rations,
whether gambled away or not; and all night long we have to watch
every portion of the ship, as they are for ever cutting holes in her
sheathing with knives they have secreted--holes for the purpose of
escaping or of scuttling her with all on board.  So, sir," he added,
with an oath, "you are likely to find yourself in pleasant company."

It would seem that on finding the ship stranded in Rye Harbour, and
so near the shore, a privateersman, notorious as a ringleader in
every disorder, cut, with the help of a knife--the edge of which he
had serrated as a saw--one of those holes to which my friend
referred, on the starboard side and just amidships.

This had been discovered in time, and in accordance with standing
orders every prisoner in that part of the ship had been put upon
half-rations to defray the expense of the repair, which the carpenter
stated at twenty-five pounds sterling.

A dreadful uproar ensued when this information was communicated to
the Frenchmen.  Wet swabs, holystones, belaying-pins, pieces of wood
torn from the hatch way-combings and deck-gratings, mops, brooms, and
everything available as a weapon, were in immediate requisition; and
the prisoners broke into open revolt on the third day after we were
on board.

The drum beat to arms, the crew drove below all who were in the
pound, battened down the hatches, and promptly ran the two
twenty-four pounders through the bulkhead aft to sweep the deck
forward if necessary; but so much was the vessel careened over in the
sand that the guns failed to work well.  Thus my twenty dismounted
Greys, with their carbines loaded, were formed in line across the
deck, ready for whatever might ensue; Lieutenant I---- having of
course command of the whole.

As the disorder was at its height, and several missiles had been
flung at us, I gave the orders--

"Ready--present!" but on finding that the din was instantly hushed, I
added, "_Advance_ arms!"

Stepping forward a few paces, and taking advantage of the lull, I was
proceeding to address the prisoners in the most conciliatory terms,
when the privateersman--a tall, strong, and swarthy fellow from
Martinique--with silver rings in his ears, and naked to the waist,
rushed upon me with a knife, in eluding which I stumbled and fell.

On seeing this, believing me to be stabbed, Tom Kirkton cried--

"Let us shoot them down--fire!"

Then a volley of carbines was poured in.  This shot the privateersman
and another dead, and severely wounded ten more.  A terrible scene
then took place at the hatchways, as the fugitives scrambled,
tumbled, and rolled over each other--falling through in heaps in
their haste to escape to the lower hold, cockpit, cable-tier, or
anywhere; all save those who lay on the deck, and one, a many in
tattered uniform, who stood calmly with arms folded, and with his
back to the mainmast, eyeing us with steady disdain, as if waiting
for the next platoon.

With my sword drawn, I stepped forward to question this rash man, and
then judge my emotion on recognising in him the--Chevalier de
Boisguiller!




CHAPTER XXIII.

"TRUTH IS STRANGER THAN FICTION."

"Fire--kill me!" exclaimed the chevalier, proudly and fiercely; "I
have no desire to live after the degradation to which you have
subjected me--I, an officer of the Queen's Hussars, and a chevalier
of the order.  _Ah, sacré!_ perfidious English--you know not how to
make war."

"Monsieur de Boisguiller, have you already forgot me--and our
meetings in the chateau of Bourgneuf, and the forest of St. Aubin du
Cormier?"

His expression changed on recognising me; but perceiving my
epaulettes, gorget, and sash--

"_Pardieu!_" he exclaimed, with a grimace on his lip, and fire
flashing in his eyes; "we seem to have changed places with a
vengeance, Monsieur l'Ecossais!"

He said something more, but his voice was rendered incoherent by the
shame and passion, pride and mortification, which almost made him
weep.

I turned to Lieutenant I----, of the _Alceste_, and inquired how it
came to pass that the chevalier, whom I knew to be a brave and
honourable French officer, should be found in a plight so deplorable,
and thrust among such associates.

"He was sent on board here for attempting to kill the captain of one
of our privateers," replied the naval officer briefly, and with a
contemptuous glance at the Frenchman.

"I shall tell you how it came to pass, monsieur; _you_ will believe
me?" said the chevalier, turning to me earnestly.

"Assuredly, monsieur."

"Our fleet is still shut up in Brest by yours; so a large privateer
of Bristol made a dash into the harbour of Cherbourg last week, to
pick up anything milord Howe had left behind him.  Among other things
they unluckily picked up me, when on my way to Erville to keep an
appointment with a little _paysanne_, who, like the rest, preferred a
Parisian hussar to a Breton woodcutter.  The privateer put to sea; I
was refused my parole of honour, and placed on board this floating
pandemonium three days before she was stranded in Rye Harbour,
because in resenting some insolence of the privateer captain, I
knocked him down and jumped overboard.  He jumped after me, and we
fought in the water till a boat's-crew picked us up.  _Pardieu_ that
is all, _mon camerade_."

I begged the officer in command of the _Alceste_ to accept the parole
of the chevalier, to which he at once agreed, and removed him to one
of the after cabins, where he was supplied with clothes to replace
his hussar uniform, which was now in rags, the ruffians of the
prison-ship having torn every shred of lace from it, to exchange for
grog with bumboat women who paddled about the frigate.

We had a bottle of wine together, and under its influence the
Frenchman's natural gaiety soon resumed its wonted sway, his
annoyance and anger disappeared, and as we conversed his voice
brought back, as in a mental panorama, the old chateau on the road to
Rennes, with its reedy lake and flower-enamelled lawn--the woods, the
hills, and rockbound shores of Brittany, with softer thoughts of a
time that would never come again--thoughts, however, that he was
singularly fated to dispel.

"The story of your encounter with Hautois, and your casting him into
the Black Torrent, where doubtless he has thrown many an unfortunate
devil, will form one of the best legends in Brittany," said he,
laughing.

"The old Countess Ninon?"

"Is well--though less blooming than her namesake, De l'Enclos."

"And Urbain--and old Bertrand?"

"All well, when I saw them last, about ten days ago.  _Peste!_ what a
number of things have happened to me since then."

"And pretty Angelique?"

"Is now the happy wife of Jacquot Triquot, coachman to M. le Curé of
St. Solidore.  The countess punished her thus for her remarkable
trick of turning you into a soubrette, my friend, which might have
been a very serious joke!"

I smiled mournfully and muttered--

"Poor--poor Jacqueline!"

"_Parbleu!_ how is it that you do not ask for her?"

"Ask for _her_?" I repeated, with sorrowful surprise; "ask for one
who is dead and buried?"

"Who _was_ half dead and half buried, you mean.  She was only stunned
by a blow, and half-smothered among leaves and grass.  She is alive
and well, _Dieu merci!_ and by this time will be in Paris with her
cousin, Comte Bourgneuf."

I remained for some moments in doubt of my senses on hearing this;
but there was an imperturbable smile on Boisguiller's face, as he sat
twirling each moustache alternately.

"Chevalier, you assure me of this on your honour," said I, hoarsely.

"On my honour as an officer wearing the cross of St. Louis.  It was a
mere case of suspended animation--nothing more.  You would have seen
this yourself had you not left us with the bloodhound in such a devil
of a hurry to follow the track of Hautois.  In fact, she spoke to us
all quite rationally in about half an hour after you disappeared."

"Chevalier, you saw how I suffered," said I, with grave reproach,
"and yet you permitted me to leave the province in the belief that
Jacqueline de Broglie was indeed dead.  Was this fair of you?"

"In love as in war, my dear fellow, all things are fair, so far as
strategy will go.  Had I told you that she was merely in a
swoon--_lethargique_--you might have been prompted to commit some new
extravagance; thus we all thought that the sooner you were
comfortably out of France the better.  She is now in Paris, and--" he
added rather spitefully, for my manner piqued him, "and will soon be
married--most suitably married."

"Married to whom?" I asked fiercely.  But he still smiled
complacently, and continued to curl his confounded moustache.  "In
Paris--ah, there she may soon forget _me_," I added, sadly.

"Forget you!  _Ouf, mon camarade!_ what would you have?  You don't
know my cousin Jacqueline.  In that huge old barrack, the lonely
chateau, you were a brother, a companion, a little bit of romance
such as we may find in Marivaux--nothing more.  In Paris, the memory
of all that will soon be effaced.  Monsieur, she cannot come
here--you cannot go there--so this is the end of the matter."  And he
burst out into a fit of laughter.

As a sequel to this conversation, my mind became oppressed by
emotions of a very mingled cast indeed, and so little desire had I
for the stinging communications of my friend the chevalier, that my
whole wish was to get rid of him handsomely as soon as possible.

I wrote to Captain Douglas and to Lieutenant Keith to inform them how
and where I had found the brave officer who had commanded in the
redoubt at Cancalle Bay, and had led those hussars whom we had met
hand to hand and bridle to bridle in Brittany.

They used their influence with old Colonel Preston, and through him
the chevalier in a short time effected an exchange with an officer of
equal rank, and was sent home to France by cartel.

Prior to this, a subdivision of marines having been placed on board
the _Alceste_, my party gladly marched back to headquarters at
Wadhurst, about twenty-five miles from Rye.




CHAPTER XXIV.

WADHURST.

Jacqueline _not_ dead, but in Paris!  It terrified and bewildered me.
Was Hautois drowned at last? might he too reappear as he had done
before, like a vampire, whom there was no destroying?  Jacqueline not
dead, but in Paris with her cousin, the handsome Comte de Bourgneuf,
to whom she was soon to be married.  This idea--this sequel to her
story, whether false or _true_, was ever before me, kindling my
jealousy, wounding my self-esteem, filling my heart with bitter
sorrow, and I longed for active service to wean me from myself; and
right glad was I when the "Route" arrived for Germany.

Wadhurst is five miles from Tunbridge Wells.  That famous Spa was
then little more than a village, but many fashionables who were there
to drink the waters, to kill time, to catch an heir or an heiress,
came over to see the corps inspected by the general of the district
on the day before we marched for the coast.

The regiment paraded in complete marching order, with valises packed,
and pouches filled with ammunition.  In addition to the usual
accoutrements for horse and man, every officer and trooper had
strapped to his saddle a nosebag, watering bridle and log, with mane
and curry-combs, sponge, horsepicker, scissors, and spare shoe, all
in a canvas cover, and a net for forage.

We received the general, John Lafausille (who four years after died
when on his way home from the Havannah), in review order, with our
trumpets sounding "Britons, strike home."  And I can remember well
the stately appearance of the old soldier, with his hair powdered and
queued, as he rode to the front of the staff, and raised his
Kevenhüller hat in salute, while the veteran Preston, erect, grim,
and stiff, in his buff coat, a relic of a past age retained by his
eccentricity, lowered his heavy broadsword in return till the blade
touched the toe of his right jackboot.  The muscular strength and
stature of our men, nearly all of whom were natives of Ayrshire, with
the beauty and high condition of our horses, excited great admiration.

A brilliant staff now passed along the line, and it was so numerous,
that to admit its passage, our rear rank went about by threes,
retired to double distance, then fronted and dressed by the pivots.
Many ladies on horseback accompanied the staff.

Among them was one in a pale blue riding-habit, with a broad hat and
white plume, who was mounted on a dashing grey pad, and rode beside
an aide-de-camp, of whom she was asking many questions; and she
seemed to be eagerly scrutinizing the corps, the officers thereof
especially.

Her companion I knew by sight to be a Major Shirley--rather a gay and
dissipated man, and a brother of that Cornet Frederick Shirley who
had wrought my friend Charters such evil when in the Dragoon Guards.

"Have you found him?" asked the major, laughing.

"No," I heard the lady reply.

"Look among the cornets."

"But how shall I know them?"

"By their cake and pudding appearance.  Besides, each carries the
standard of his troop."

They were now close to me, and I carried the standard of the Light
Troop, with the staff resting on the toe of my right boot, so the
young lady, a handsome girl with fair, almost golden hair, a delicate
complexion, and dark blue eyes, turned and looked fully at me.

She was my cousin Aurora!

Though it was for me she had been looking, she coloured deeply, bowed
and smiled, and then grew pale--so pale that her friend the staff
major observed it, and said, drily:

"So, Miss Gauntlet, you have found him, then?"

"Yes--oh yes, and knew him immediately."

"Then I hope you are pleased," said the major, biting his nether-lip
and adroitly catching the bridle of her horse, which reared at a
sudden crash of the trumpets that drowned her reply as the cavalcade
passed on.

The ranks were now closed.

"Dress the line by the standards, Major Maitland," cried Colonel
Preston.  "Who is that fool yonder throwing the whole line out?" he
added, as a sergeant's horse became restive and reared on its hind
legs.

"A fool, but for whom, Colonel, you would have been years ago in your
grave at Stapledyke," replied the sergeant, quietly.

"Egad you are right, Duff, for you saved my life there--forgive my
anger, comrade," said the kind old officer.

"I would forgive you any thing, Colonel," replied the old sergeant in
the same under tone, while his eyes filled; "for you and I are the
last left of the Greys who rode in the charge on the bloody day in
South Beveland."

The review was soon over; we passed the general in open column of
troops, charged in squadrons and in line, amid whirlwinds of
dust--went through sword and carbine exercise, were complimented by
the general and harangued by the colonel; then the men were dismissed
to their quarters, while the officers joined the staff and the ladies
at luncheon, in a large marquee which had been erected on a pleasant
lawn for the purpose.

A stranger amid that gay throng, and caring little on the eve of
embarkation whether or not I made new acquaintances, I was attending
to one or two stout and elderly mammas, who being neither handsome
nor blooming, had been somewhat neglected; and while doing the
honours with our cold fowl, pink cream and champagne, a voice close
by me said:

"And so, Basil, you are going to the seat of war?"

I looked around, and found Aurora Gauntlet's blue eyes bent on me
with something of sad earnestness.

"You will shake hands with me, Basil--won't you?"

I coloured and trembled with pride, perplexity, and even annoyance;
but pressed her hand in mine, though the wrongs I had suffered at the
behest of our grandfather swelled up bitterly in my heart.

"So, Basil," she resumed, smiling, "I have brought your military
escapade to a creditable--to a pleasant termination; have I not?"

"I felt quite certain, Miss Gauntlet, that it was to you I owed my
epaulettes, and I pray you to accept of my gratitude for your
friendship and memory.  My military escapade!  Is it thus you term
the resource of stern necessity?  Would it have been an escapade had
I turned highwayman, or joined some desperate privateer?  Few
resources are left to a penniless gentleman, so I chose the most
honourable."

"I deplore your bitterness of spirit, cousin Basil," said she, "and I
pity you; but what could--what _can_ I do?"

"I ask no pity, Miss Gauntlet," I replied, somewhat ruffled; "but
permit me to lead you from this--here we cannot converse with
freedom."  And taking her hand, we went forth into the sunny lawn,
Aurora holding her riding-habit gathered in her left hand, her
ostrich feather drooping over her right shoulder, and very lovely and
graceful she looked in the bloom of her youth and beauty.

"Forgive me," said she, almost with tears in her eyes, and a quiver
on her pouting lip, for she knew in what a hostile aspect I viewed
her; "but I think your conduct to me, as a kinswoman who seeks to
befriend you, most unkind and ungracious!  Think of what is before
you, and that we may never see or meet each other again."

I laughed and replied,

"We have not seen much of each other hitherto, Miss Gauntlet."

"Call me Aurora!" said she, grasping her switch with an impulse that
was not all playfulness.

"But then, when I am such a scape-grace--outcast if you will--what
the devil does it matter what is before me, or how soon I am shot?
Thanks to you, however, my dear cousin, I shall die in the position
of a gentleman."

"I would have sent you a few hundred guineas on your promotion,
Basil; but mamma reminded me of your dangerous pride, your haughty
and resentful spirit, so I tore up the cheque after signing it."

"You judged rightly, my dear cousin; but I thank you, though I would
not have accepted the money.  The commission you have thrust upon
me----"

"Thrust--oh fie, Basil!  It was simply managed," said she, smiling,
"by a note from mamma to Mr. Pitt, the great commoner, who was once
himself a cornet of cavalry; in the Blues, I think, was he not?"

"That commission I hoped to have won otherwise.  However----" I
paused, as there was a tearful and angry expression in Aurora's eyes,
and very beautiful eyes they were, with lashes thick, dark, and long,
which imparted to them a charming softness.  Then cousinship is such
a strange affinity--something like a sister and more like a
sweetheart, that I committed some very ungracious speech to silence,
for I now began to perceive that from her mother Aurora inherited a
true English girl's face, in expression the sweetest, in features the
softest, perhaps, in the world.

"And you march----" she began, to change the subject.

"To-morrow, at eight in the morning."

"So early!  Yet I shall ride over from Tunbridge Wells to see you
off."

"Thank you, Aurora; but at such an hour----"

"Oh, I shall not want for an escort, believe me.  Major Shirley and a
dozen others will only be too happy.  And now that we are to be
friends from henceforward, confess that you have been wrong, cousin
Basil, and that I have been right!"

"Perhaps--it is the privilege of all handsome girls to be right,
whatever view they take."

"Did you learn this in France?" she asked, with a steady glance.

"Ah!" said I, and with the thought of Jacqueline, my heart seemed to
die within me; "in France I preserved your handkerchief (you remember
our race on Banstead Heath), and it saved my life from a bullet at
St. Malo."

Her soft, peachlike cheek flushed with honest pleasure when I said
this, but ere she could reply, Major Shirley--a privileged man
evidently was this devil of a major, and a very handsome one to
boot--came forward, saying--

"Miss Gauntlet, I beg pardon, but I have been looking for you
everywhere."

"Why?" asked Aurora, raising her eyebrows.

"You are forgetting the hour, and that I promised your mamma to see
you safely back to Tunbridge Wells betimes."

"Adieu, Basil!"

"Till to-morrow," I added.

She kissed her gloved hand to me, and the smiling major led her away
with all haste.

I was happier after this interview than I had been for many a day.
The kindness that the warmhearted and impulsive Aurora seemed to
cherish for me gave her another and a nearer interest in my mind.
Animosity died within me, and I began to think it was charming to
have at least one relation who loved me for myself, and I thought of
our old Scottish proverb, which says that "Blood is thicker than
water."  Moreover, how could she help the tenor of my crusty
grandfather's odious will, or that fatality by which my cousin Tony
broke his valuable neck and made her an heiress?

We paraded duly for the march next day.  The several troops were
formed, their rolls called, and as the clock of the old market-place
struck eight, the whole regiment moved off amid the cheers of the
populace and the lamentations of those soldiers' wives who were left
behind with their poor little ones, their treasured marriage lines,
and a "begging pass" to their own parish wherever it might be--too
often the usual and cruel wind-up of military matrimony.

At that moment Aurora Gauntlet, mounted on her dashing grey--a pad
she rode in compliment to _us_--her cheeks flushed by a long ride in
the pure morning air, her skirt and plume and golden hair floating
behind her, cantered up to the column, accompanied by Major Shirley
in his staff uniform, and by John Trot, the valiant hero of
Wandsworth Common, in very gay livery, and like the staff officer,
well mounted.

"I'm just in time, I find," said she, as I drew aside from my troop
(which being the Light one was in the rear, as the corps was marched
with the right in front) and reined up beside her.

"I was looking for you anxiously, Aurora.  Will you keep this
document for me, cousin? for if I am killed in Germany, I have no
desire that it should be used by some boor to light his pipe with or
wrap his butter in."

It was the diploma of the Netherwood baronetcy, running in the name
of "CAROLUS, DEI GRATIA, REX SCOTIÆ ET ANGLIÆ, &c. &c., _nostro
Johanni Gauntleti de Netherwood, ejusque hæredibus masculis de
corpore, &c., titulam gradum et dignitatem militis Baronetti in hac
antiqua parte Regni Nostri Scotiæ,_" and so forth.

"You shall be the custodier of this choice piece of archæology, for
with my sword, Aurora, it is all my inheritance now.  In my haversack
or valise I have borne it ever since old Nathan Wylie, Sir Basil's
evil mentor, sent it to me as a taunt amid my misfortunes."

"You would still reproach me?" said she, in a low voice.

"Nay, Aurora, on my soul I do not."

"I thank you," she replied, with her eyes brimful of tears; for in
addition to the peculiar position in which we stood, nothing melts a
woman's heart so much as the aspect of a fine regiment departing for
foreign service in time of war.  "My mother has become feeble and
ailing--I shall soon be alone in the world, so think kindly of me,
Basil, when you are far away, even as we shall think kindly of you,
for we are the last of our family--the last of the old Gauntlets of
Netherwood."

"I am, rather than you," said I, smiling.

"How?"

"Some one, of course, will marry you, so I must be the last."

She blushed painfully, and her glance wandered to Shirley, but his
_eyes_, at least, appeared to be intent upon the marching column.

"I am going to Germany now, perhaps never to return; for news I have
heard (here I referred to the strange tidings of Boisguiller) have
made me, even in youth, somewhat reckless of life."

"Oh, Basil, Basil! you must not speak thus."

"Sir, Colonel Preston is looking back for _you_," said Major Shirley,
with a slight tone of impatience and authority in his voice.  "And
there sounds a trumpet."

"Then we do part friends at last?" said Aurora, with a sad smile.

"Yes, dear cousin, the best of friends."

She held up her cheek to be kissed by me; but somehow her rosy lip
came in its place.

I saw Shirley's face darken, but heeded it little, as I put spurs to
my grey and dashed after the regiment, which was now trotting along
the highway which led towards Brighton.




CHAPTER XXV.

SAIL FOR GERMANY.

We had been very comfortable in our quiet country quarters in Sussex,
and being so near London, our officers led a gay life, for at least
one-half of them were always in town "between returns;" but now
Ranelagh and Vauxhall, with their fireworks and lighted promenades,
their belles, beaux, music, and gaiety; the _ridotti_, the opera, the
theatres, and entertainments _al fresco_ in the beautiful West-end
parks, or by barges up the Thames to Richmond or to Hampton Court,
were all to be exchanged for the long dusty march by day or the dark
and weary one by night--the tented camp, the wet bivouac, and the
perils of the German war.

The regiment was embarked on board of two frigates--the _Venus_ and
_Thames_.  The Light Troop was in the latter, under Major Maitland.

Owing to the circumstances of the expedition, and that the frigates,
after landing us, were to run down the Channel and join the Brest
blockading fleet, under Anson and Howe, discipline was somewhat
relaxed, and the seamen and marines were permitted the privilege of
having their wives, sweethearts, and friends on board.  So there were
enough, and to spare, of singing and weeping, swearing, smoking, and
even fighting between decks.

To most of us the atmosphere, especially below, was rendered
insupportable by the mingled odours of bilge, coarse tobacco,
purser's gin, and new paint, while the language heard on every side
was neither classical nor poetical; and this continued until the Blue
Peter appeared fluttering from the frigate's foremasthead, and the
boom of one of her bow-chasers announced that all shore-people must
leave.  Then began the howling of women and the grumbling of the
seamen, many of whom, to express their discontent, roared in chorus a
song then popular among taverns and crimping-houses, a portion of
which ran thus:--

  "Ere Hawke did bang Mounseer Conflan,
  We had plenty of beef and beer;
  _Now_ Mounseer's beat, we've little to eat,
  And d----n the drop of gin so neat,
    Since John Bull's nought to fear."


After having most severe weather at sea, we were landed at the
quaint, old, and Dutch-like town of Embden, about the middle of
September.

There we remained two days, giving our horses gentle exercise after
the cramps of the sea voyage, riding them by the long canals which
intersect the city, and by the sluices of which the whole surrounding
country can be inundated in time of war.  The officers received a
banquet from the burgomaster and Count of Embden in the old feudal
castle of the latter, and then we marched to join the allied British
and Hanoverians, who were now commanded by Prince Ferdinand of
Brunswick.

I shall never forget that route, which occupied ten days.  The rain
poured incessantly, and we had to traverse a low, marshy country, few
portions of which were less than fetlock deep in water.  Many of the
towns we passed through had been destroyed; the inhabitants of others
declined to be incommoded.  Thus we frequently bivouacked amid the
wet, being quite without tents; but old Colonel Preston always
cheered us on.  Sometimes he would say, as some of us nodded over our
holsters, when riding wearily on in the grey dawn that heralded
another day of toil and travel:

"You are weary, my gude lads; we shall halt in an hour; but there can
be no sleep even then, unless with the sword in the hand and the foot
in the stirrup."

On one of those wretched marches I had command of the regimental
baggage-guard, and was hourly annoyed by the master waggoner, an East
Frieslander, who was never sober, as he drank constantly from a keg
of Schiedam which hung at the back of his wain, and his companions
assured me that he had never been sober for a year--others averred
that he had been born drunk, so great a toper was he.  I was riding a
little way in rear of the escort, which was traversing a fetid swamp
from whence a pestilential evening mist was rising white as milk,
when amid that gloomy vapour there suddenly rose in front a lambent
light of a pale hue.  Then a cry of dismay from Hob Elliot and others
of my men, made me trot up to the spot, where I beheld a very
appalling spectacle.

The Friesland waggoner was lying on his back, and literally on
fire--flames were issuing from his crackling nostrils, mouth, and
ears, and even, while we gazed on him, his whole face and hair were
burned away, while the fire seemed to pass over his whole body,
scorching his clothes to powder.

Dr. Lancelot Probe, our surgeon, came speedily back from the front,
but the Frieslander was already beyond his skill, having expired in
agony.  It was a case of spontaneous combustion.  Probe naturally
conjectured that a spark from his pipe--which he yet firmly
grasped--had ignited the fumes of the spirit within him, and the
subtle gases issuing from every pore and orifice, had kindled at once
to fire, on reaching the external air.

Be it as it may, the terrible episode of the Frieslander had the
effect of keeping some of our most tipsy fellows sober for many a
week after.

Our mode of passing the night was generally thus.

A ridge would be selected; we dismounted and cloaked, throwing a
portion over the saddle and holsters, each man standing by his horse,
and holding on by the stirrup leather to steady himself if sleeping,
as he was pretty sure to be.  Despite the danger of lying down among
the horses' hoofs, some did so in utter weariness, but were soon
forced to get up again, lest their own chargers should tread on them.

Moreover, a dragoon accoutred cannot lie on his back for the spurs
that are on his heels, and the cartridge-box between his shoulders,
nor on his right side for his haversack, nor on his left for his
canteen and sword-hilt; thus, when harnessed, he has no resource but
to sleep on his face with his nose and toes in the turf!

So the dreary night would pass--the trumpet pour its melancholy twang
through the mist at daybreak, and amid the pestilential swamp we
would groom our horses or imagine that we did so; pour the water out
of our boots; partake of a ration biscuit soaked by the night rain to
pulp, if nothing better could be had; denounce the Hanoverians for
whom we, H.M. Scots Greys, endured all this discomfort, and then
again resume the march, which ended on the 31st of September, when we
joined Prince Ferdinand at Coesveldt, a small but fortified town in
Westphalia.

On those long marches, Tom Kirkton--he had now attained the rank of
troop-sergeant--and I had many a confab as of old, for on service
rank makes little difference, if discipline be retained.  He
frequently and bluntly urged that I should "lay siege," as he phrased
it, "to my pretty cousin, and marry her, and so quit this miserable
work.  Lay siege!" he added, on one occasion; "you don't require to
do that, for I have no doubt she is anxious enough to hook you for
the mere sake of being Lady Gauntlet."

"This is most flattering, Tom; and so you would have me pander to a
spirit so mercenary.  Nay, nay; I cannot judge of her thus; and by
this time perhaps she is the wife of Major Shirley, whom I left in
possession of the field."

But Tom's advice, though heedlessly given, always rankled long and
bitterly in my mind.

And now, lest the reader may naturally inquire what object we had in
making a tour of Germany, I may briefly state that his Britannic
Majesty's native and well-beloved Electorate of Hanover had been
overrun by a French army, to expel whom, Prince Ferdinand of
Brunswick had put himself at the head of the German troops, and to
reinforce these, six regiments of British infantry and some cavalry
had joined him, and were now under the command of Lord George
Sackville.  Since the accession of the house of Guelph to the throne,
the whole taxes and energies of the British people had been
systematically devoted to the defence of Hanover and the pauper
princelings of Germany; just as in the preceding age they had been
wasted in defence of King William's dearly-beloved Dutch; and it was
not until the peace of Paris that, as an historian says, the nation
"would no longer suffer the public treasure to be squandered on poor
foreign princes under the name of subsidies, to enable them to fight
their own battles, nor the blood of British soldiers to be spilt to
water the forests and fertilize the plains of Germany."

However, these are after-thoughts; of such we took little heed then,
and cared less whom we fought, or where, remembering only a soldier's
first duty--implicit obedience.

I shall briefly state that we skirmished through all Westphalia; that
during these operations I received a slight pistol wound in the
bridle hand; Colonel Preston had a horse shot under him, and Tom
Kirkton a standard pole broken by a grape-shot, and so forth, until
the month of November, when we retired to winter quarters at the
little city of Alphen, in the Bishopric of Paderborn, where we
remained quietly recruiting our energies for a new struggle in the
early part of the ensuing year.

The allies, 34,000 strong, were led, as I have stated, by Ferdinand
of Brunswick, one of the most celebrated generals of the age; but
opposed to him were two maréchals of France, one, whose name found an
echo in my heart, the Duc de Broglie, and the other M. de Contades,
with 60,000 troops, the flower of the French line--men at whose hands
the British and Hanoverians had suffered a series of reverses which
made us long for spring, that the contest might be renewed and ended
for ever.



END OF VOL. II.




  LONDON:
  SAVILL AND EDWARDS, PRINTERS,
  CHANDOS-STREET.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECOND TO NONE, VOLUME 2 (OF 3) ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
